title page

TE UNGA WAKA
HURI TAU
25

SILVER JUBILEE 5TH MARCH 1966 TO 1991

page 1

Preface
He wahi mihi, ki a koutou katoa, nga hoa, nga whanaunga o te whanau o Te Unga Waka.
Tena ra koutou, huri noa te motu. Nga kanohi ora, tena koutou katoa. Me Koutou hoki kua
nunumi ki tua o te arai, ekore koutou e wareware ake ake. Haere ki te unga o nga waka,
Haere ki te wa kainga o to tatou Ariki o Hehu Karaiti. Haere, haere, haere.
The only time people read a Preface is when they can't understand what the book is
about. So, just briefly, this is a book of memories. It's like a Family Album of Photos. It
may not be of much interest to others, but to family and friends, it's great fun.
It took a long time to gather together the old photos ... at least that's my excuse
and to tap into the writing talents of the different authors, all of whom were part of the
events narrated here ... and to make sure we got the names right on the photos. If you
find any mistakes, tell them to the person who's going to do the Golden Jubilee
Magazine. By that time, most of us will have been gathered by the strong hand of aitua.
So here and now I leave all my photos to that person, and hope you all do the same, so
that the next generation can enjoy them.
Kia ora,
Kia tupu tonu.
Naku noa,
Na Pa Ryan

Bishop Denis P.2
Bishop John Mackey 3
Kaumatua Ball 4
Our Story 5 - 24
Dean Alink's Jubilee 6
Miha Maori St Pat's 7
Pa Wiremu Te Awhitu 8 - 9
Missioner in Auckland 9
St Annes 11 - 12
Mill Hill Fathers 13
Fund Raising 15
Queen Carnival 15
Rangimarie 17
Ordination Pa Henare 18
1st Mass Pa Henare 19
Little Princess Carnival 21
Old Bakery 23
Opening Te Unga Waka 24
Pa Hani 25
Tribute to Wiki 26 - 29
Ta te Wahine Titiro 30 - 32
Te Unga Waka Today 33
The Future ? 37
Piripi Munro 38
Pa Kereti Cushlow 39
Waitaruke 40
Pa Wiremu Tuerlings 42
Pa Tony Brown 33
Race Horses 44
Pa Ateriano 45 - 46
Christ the Maori 47 - 53
Jubilee Week 54 - 63
Youth Club 64 - 69
Pa Pat Dunne 70
Pa Peter Hay McKenzie 71
Pa Piripi Sullivan 71
Pa Kereti Haring 72
Legion of Mary 73 - 75
Pa Mikaere Shirres 76
Martha v.d. Voorn 77
Pa Henare 78
Auntie Martha Cash 79 - 81
Pa Matiu 82 - 83
Pio & Chris Jacobs 84 - 88
Uncle Eric Kidd 89 - 91
Pa Hoani Dijkman 92
Alaska 93 - 94
Charlie Shelford 95 - 96
Mill Hill 97
Religious Orders 98
Diocesans 98
Kaiarahi 99
Officials of Te Unga Waka 100
Pa Rawiri Bennett 101
Credit Union 102
Occasions at Te Unga Waka 103
Kiri Te Kanawa 104
Queen Te Ata 105
Visit to Rome 106

page 2 

The Bishop's Office
Pompallier Diocesan Centre
Ponsonby
Auckland

Phone 784-380

"He moana pukepuke e ekengia e te Waka."E tika ana tenei whakatauki mo te marae nei o Te
Unga Waka. Ko tenei te tau tiuperi hiriwa. Ahakoa te nui o nga ngaru i nga tau kua pahure, kei
te pai tonu te rere o te waka. No reira ka nui taku mihi ki a koutou nga kaihautu o te waka. Tena
koutou katoa. Me ratou hoki kua wheturangitia, takoto mai i roto i te Ariki. Haere ki te kainga
mau tonu o te rangi. Haere ki te rangimarie, haere, haere, haere.

It is significant that we celebrate the Silver Jubliee of the establishing of Te Unga Waka Marae
in the year 1991.

Last year we were given a unique opportunity to address ourselves as a nation and see how far
we have made progress since the days of promise and high expectation that surrounded the signing
of the Treaty of Waitangi.

1990 was a year of honesty and, I believe, a year of growth in the way in which we sought to
remedy injustice and the lack of respect. Such a year would not have been possible without a lot
previous preparation. The life of Te Unga Waka Marae has been one of the many gifts that has
brought us to this stage of our journey.

As we reflect upon the past 25 years, we can thank God for the way in which Te Unga Waka has
been the heart of the Catholic Maori Community in Tamaki Makaurau. We think of the many
Masses that have been offered, the pastoral care that has emanated from Te Unga Waka, the
many tangi and the numerous occasions on which hospitality has been offered to Maori and
Pakeha.

May the Lord continue to bless everything that is connected with the life of Te Unga Waka
Marae. May the Jubilee celebrations help us to deepen our faith and renew our support for Te
Unga Waka.

No reira, kia u ki nga taonga a o koutou tunpuna, te Pono, te Tika me te Aroha. Kia kaha, kia
manawanui.

Ma te Atua koutou e manaaki, e tiaki a nga tau kei te haere mai. Tena koutou, tena koutou, tena
koutou katoa.

Aroha nui.


God bless you.


+Denis Browne
Bishop of Auckland

page 3

Bishop Mackey
GREETINGS FROM BISHOP JOHN MACKEY

Agnes Beach is given the hoe by Bishop Mackey

E te iwi, tena koutou.
Tena koutou e hari nei i tenei, te huritau
rua tekau ma rima o Te Unga Waka.
Ka nui taku mihi ki a koutou katoa.

Twenty five years is a short time in the life of a
people, but it is a long time in the life of a person. Te
Unga Waka is now twenty five years old. It still has a
long, long life before it, if that is what you want and
will work for.

On the other hand, Te Unga Waka in twenty five
years has seen the people die; the people born; the
babies baptised; the people married; and the people
mourn and rejoice. Because this is God's house all
that human activity has been given a blessing, a
meaning and a quality that transforms the human

experience, the Maori experiences into a Christian
experience.
At Te Unga Waka - this is my prayer for you
Ko te paki no Ruhi e horahia ki waho -
May peace be spread everywhere.
And that peace of soul is the special gift that Jesus
gives us.
So I pray, on this Jubilee, that you will continue, as
you did with me, to give loving loyalty to your priests,
the Mill Hill Fathers who are yours in a special way,
and now also to the Diocesan Priests who have been
appointed to carry on the work, and to Bishop Denis,
as well as constant support to one aother in making
Te Unga Waka what it was founded for twenty five
years ago, a house for Emmanual (God-with-us) and
a home for his children.
May the Lord bless and keep you;

Maisie Waru receives the kakahu from Pio Hakop

The Lord make his face shine upon you
and be gracious to you;
The Lord lift up his countenance upon you
and give you peace.
Ma lhowa koutou e manaaki,
Maana koutou e tiaki
Ma lhowa e mea kia tiaho tona mata ki a koutou
Maana ano hoki koutou e atawhai
Ma lhowa tona kanohi e whakaara ki a koutou
Maana ano e tuku te rangimarie
ki a koutou

Aroha nui

Bishop John Mackey

Agnes Beach is given the hoe by Bishop Mackey

Pat Te Awhitu receives the hoe urungi from Bishop John

Maisie Waru receives the kakahu from Pio Hakopa

Eddie Tapara receives his authority

page 4

THE KAUMATUA BALL
(These are the ones I can see, you may be able to spot others)
Rob McLean, Wiki Hotere, Koherangi, Bill & Kathy Puru, Martha Collins, Winnie Albert,
Jack Peri, Raiha Sarich, Mane Diane Ka Corbett, Dan Rapira, Rehu Woods, Elva Kirby,
Eric Kidd, Annie Campbell, Rini Wimutu, Joe Te Tai, Joe Korewha, Toby Curtis,
Pa Kereti Cushlow, Martha Cash, Dick Parker, Maria Parker, Pa Tony, Sr. Elizabeth.

O NGA

TE

MARAMATANGA

Eve Te Tana (Gallen) & Joe Broughton

Mr & Mrs Rob McLean and family

HATO HOHEPA COLLEGE BALL
Tui Swanenbeck, Sr Chanel, Piripi Munro, Ike Topia,
Ella Robinson, Pa Kereti Cushlow, Hon. Tirikatene-Sullivan,
Pa Teo Wanders, Sr Patricia, Sr Kathleen

Sadie Hussey and daughter

page 5

OUR STORY

BEFORE TE UNGA WAKA

KO TE HEKENGA NUI

Imagine Auckland in the nineteen thirties. "Clang,
clang ... " goes the tram up and down Queen Street and
off to the far away suburbs of Avondale and Epsom.
Henderson is really in the wopwops. Over the harbour by
ferryboat, it's a couple of miles walk to the little college
of Hato Petera or St. Peter's Maori College, Northcote.

DEAN ALINK

Dean Alink is the Tumuaki and the aim of the college is
to train Katekita to be spiritual leaders in their own
communities. They study the basics plus Maori
language, the Holy Scriptures and theology and some
scientific agriculture. A visit to the city takes all day; and
if you want to take the car across, it's a real hoha.
There's very few Maori living in town. "Guess what" said
the Dean to Pa Anehema, "I saw a Maori on the tram
today."

There's a few Cinemas, beautifully decorated like the
Civic and a few Dance Halls and Theatre provide
entertainment. Not every home has a radio. They're big,
heavy things, called wirelesses. The daily papers or the
Weekly Illustrated News keep people in touch with one
another and the big world.

WORLD WAR II

People keep hearing about a fellow called Herr Hitler.
He was throwing his weight around in Europe, taking
over the countries and making inflammatory speeches.
Hitara Waha Huka - Hitler the frothy mouth, says the
Maori haka about him, referring to his rantings and
ravings. Then in September 1939 the War starts. Most of
us can't get into the army quick enough. "Come on, let's
join up!" "It might be over before we get a chance to see
the world!"

KO TE HEKENGA NUI

With the War, the heavy industries start to pic
Food supplies are needed "over there". The wharves are 
really humming. They need strong workers. "Get some of 
those strong bushmen to come to town." The same
happens for the Power-lines, Telephones, Road,
Railways. Word gets around that there are jobs
Remember this is after the dreary, hungry years of the
depression. There's work too for the ladies. The
make good wages in the light industries like pottery
lolly-making. They have to take over jobs that men used
to do. There's a big need for cleaners and cooks
the trains are busy bringing families to the big
mainly from Northland.

THE BIG CITY
In the beginning it's the inner city for them, Greys Avenue,
Wellington Street, Pitt Street, Cook Street, Grafton
Lynn, Ponsonby. All became familiar names.  Some
families found good boarding houses and families
formed lasting friendship, like the Shannahan, Waru and
Hohepa families. But a lot of rental housing is rubbish!
Peeling wallpaper, rotting wood-work, cracked pipes
and drains.

The wise families soon learned how to put money
aside to save up for a section in one of the new suburbs
like New Lynn. Unfortunately many of our families had no
experience in getting loans and help.

KEI HEA TE WHARE KARAKIA?

City life can be a lot of fun; but "Where is the marae"?
"Where is the Church?" (Heard outside St Benedict's).
"Hey is this a church? I thought it was a factory or
something.") Many of our people went to St. Patrick's
Cathedral for Sunday Mass. Then the Sisters who taught
in St. Patrick's School in Wellington Street, offered the 
use of a classroom for Miha Maori. At week-ends Pa
Werahiko (Father Frank Rice) came over from
Petera to say Mass. Word got around and soon even the 
classrooms were not enough and the crowd spilt out into 
the passage and entrance.


FR RICE

page 6

SILVER JUBILEE OF DEAN ALINK - JULY 23rd 1944
(See how many you can recognise - we spotted the following, - from the left :- ) Jack Abraham, Ben Turi, Whina Martin, Raiha Heremaia,
Barbara Hoera, Mary Ellen (Rena), Harry Cassidy, Henry Leef, Rosie Witana, Charlotte Butler, Maraea Peita (Wharo), Matiu Witana, Margaret Boyce, Bella Cassidy, Martha
Collins, Ripeka Thompson, Adrian Penny, Tim Hunia, Susan Witana, Matatua, Henry Te Hira, Mrs Henry Leef, Kingi Morunga, Susie Kanuta, Charlotte Cassidy, Toby Adams,
Mrs Tatana, Celia Te Tai, Clem Te Tai, Matiu Junior, Bob Peri, Dolly Peri (Matthews), Bill Te Whiu. (In centre:) Br Aloysius, Fr Rice, Dean Alink, Br. Egbert.
If you recognise others, let us know at Te Unga Waka.

PAGE 7

Miha Maori, St. Pat's, Wellington Street,
Celebrant is Pa Tewano
Servers are Matiu Hotere and Bully Kendall

If you recognise others, let us know at Te Unga Waka.

Catholic Social Centre, Pitt St.
Winnie Te Tai & Fred Riini, Henry Noa & Olive, Flo Makoare & Sol Waharai
Ted Rapira, Charlotte McLean, Henry & Miria Cassidy, Betty & Kevin Beasley, Bully Kendall.

PAGE 8

They were very strong in their Whakapono. Some of the
Katekita would lead the karakia o te Miha while the
priest and alter-server said the Latin. When the weather
was fine they all gathered in the playground to meet and
hear news from home. Most people didn't yet have a
phone. Baptisms and weddings and house-blessings
were organised. Families still took babies back home to
be "done" but quite a few Baptisms took place in St
Patrick's Cathedral. Already people were saying:
"Wouldn't it be nice to have a place of our own." But
even by 1942 the total of Catholic Maori in Auckland is
only 450.

FINANCE

On the whole our people are pretty pohara. Wages
were good but city living was very expensive. We had
plenty of nama, especially those who were buying their
homes. There wasn't much loose cash. The Mill Hill
Fathers live on the smell of an oily rag. Their personal
allowance at this time was £15 a year.


To finance the work of the Maori Mission in the
Diocese of Auckland (which then also included the
Hamilton Diocese), every parish was asked to have a
special appeal each year. Bishop Liston asked dean
Alink to provide Preachers to go and speak in a different
parish every Sunday, to explain the work and the way
the finances were to be used. Fathers Lagan, Wardle
and Devolder took on this work and they even answered
invitations to go and preach in the South Island. The
money from these appeals helped to build schools in
places like Pawarenga and Waihi-Tokaanu and also
supported the missioners and the teaching Sisters.

Dean Alink was very careful with the money and made it
it stretch as far as possible. But did he realised what a 
valuable asset a hall would be for the Maori people of 
Auckland. Bishop Liston supported the idea and got
people to look out for somewhere suitable.

PA WIREMU TE AWHIT

In December 1944 the Maori people celebrated a 
unique event. Pa Wiremu Te Awhitu was ordained in the 
Cathedral in Napier. He was the first Maori to reach the 
Turanga Tapu of the priesthood. His tribal connections
branched out to nearly every tribe but his main
allegiance was to Ngati Maniapoto, Wangaui, Ngati 
Tuwharetoa and Ngati Haua.
He had studied at Hato Petera College when it
still a Catechist School. It was there that he felt the call
of his vocation. Dean Alink helped and encouraged him.
In those days the Church authorities were very, very
cautious. Every candidate for the Catholic Priesthood
was given a very strict training. Bishop Liston was more
cautious than most. The best thing we can say about it
was that he was anxious for Wiremu to be a success.
Instead of accepting him for the Auckland Diocese,
Bishop Liston thought it would be best if Wiremu joined
an order like the Marist Fathers. They accepted Wiremu
and gave him a very thorough - and long - period of
training.

FIRST MAORI CATHOLIC

But, finally, the great day arrived and Pa Wiremu 
received the sacred gift of the priesthood, in the 
Cathedral (since burned down).  Dean Alink was
Chaplain. Three weeks later he came to Auckland to
celebrate his first Mass in St Patrick's Cathedral.

page 9

Outside St Patrick's Cathedral, after Pa Wiremu's First Mass.

Centre: Bp Liston, Pa Wiremu, Dean Alink. Fr Hazelzet is on left
Brothers Aloysius and Egbert on right. Do you recognise any whanaunga?

There weren't many Maori living in Auckland in 1944,
but the Cathedral was packed. Many had made the
special trip from the North and from Pa Wiremu's iwi
from Taumarunui. Dean Alink and Pa Eruera (Fr Bruning)
were his Deacon and Subdeacon. They were both over
six foot tall and towered over him. But it was a very
happy occasion, made especially so by his fellow
students who came up from Napier and gave him a
great welcome after the Mass. We used the Manchester
Unity Hall for the celebrations. Once more the Auckland
Maori were saying, "Wouldn't it be nice to have our own
hall!"

NGAPUHI WELCOME
The Marist Fathers gladly gave Wiremu the chance to
visit the Maori parishes in the north. At first he was very
shy. But as he went from one marae to the next, he grew
in confidence and his Maori wairua began to come out
more. One old Kuia said, "E Pa, this is what I've lived for,
to receive Communion from a brown hand."
After some fourteen years hard work on the Maori
Mission in the Wellington Diocese, Pa Wiremu suffered a
stroke-like illness which paralysed his speech. He
gradually recovered from it and was able to return to his
priestly work to some degree. He was a geat source of
spiritual help to the poets and thinkers who came to
Hiruharama while he was there and they respected him
highly. Recently he has returned with his sister Mrs June
Mclntosh to the family papa kainga in Okahuhura near
Taumaranui, for his retirement years.

GREY LYNN HALL
Not long after the ordination a big hall in Grey Lynn
was put up for sale. The Dean made an offer which was
accepted. But something made the seller change his
mind at the last minute. Perhaps he was afraid because
we were Maori or because we were Catholic - or a bit of
both! There was a lot of religious bigotry and racism
about at the time.

THE WAR ENDS
In may 1945 the war ended in Europe, but it took
another four months and two atom bombs to finish off
the Japanese resistance. But it was many months before
the troops all came back. Four old boys of Hato Petera
had been reported "missing in action believed killed".
The Dean and all Hato Petera had a tangi for them and a
Miha Tupapaku for the repose of their souls. But like all
good Hato Petera boys, they turned up late, having been
prisoners of war. John Taylor (Uncle Mac's youngest
brother) was one of them.

RESIDENT MISSIONER IN AUCKLAND
Pa Kereti Aarts had taken over the Sunday Mass in St
Pat's school. Fr Rice had become ill and died in 1949,
still only a young man. The Dean was looking for a pirihi
Maori who could live in Auckland City and serve the
people there. With the ending of the war, Pa Tewano
could return to New Zealand. In 1934 he had gone to
Mill Hill London to represent us at the St Joseph's
Society Conference. He ended up being elected
Superior General for all the Mill Hill Missions throughout
the world. It is a difficult job at the best of times, but the
World War made it almost impossible. Many of his
priests were imprisoned, some in the Philippines were
killed and many churches and schools were destroyed.
Pa Tewano began the work of rebuilding and then
turned his steps back to Aotearoa, arriving in late 1947.

Page 10

Pa Wiremu
Te Awhitu
Pirihi Maori
Tuatahi

Pa Wiremu visiting Tai Tokerau (1949?)



RENALL STREET
With many families looking for homes in the big City, it
wasn't easy to get a house. Pa Tewano was lucky to get
4 Renall Street in Ponsonby. It had no phone and he
never did get one put in. He got a car, but never "broke
it in". It used to take charge of him, so most people were
relieved to see him on his old push-bike. It must have
been hard going, pushing up and down Cook and

WEDDING DAY - 26 NOV 1949
Kathy and Trevor Allen with Pa Tewano

Wellington Streets and College Hill. "We used to look
forward to Father's visits as kids," one of our people
remembered. "He would turn up on his bicycle with a
few lollies in his pocket.

HALL IN PONSONBY
In 1949 another hall came up for sale. This time it was
in Ponsonby. The terms were agreed and Archbishop
Liston went along with the Dean and Pa Tewano to
clinch the deal. (Knowing them they probably toasted it
in orange juice!)
Unfortunately, at this time, the city council was getting
very uptight about residential and industrial areas. The
hall was in a residential area. That was that! It could not
be used as a Maori Centre. It was argued back and forth
with the Council, but the rules were new and no one was
going to bend them. Ironically the same old hall sees
dozens of Samoan families coming for second-hand
clothing sales every Saturday.
THE FIFTIES
Suddenly we were into the nineteen fifties. There was
full employment. England was taking all the food we
could produce. The farmers were happy and the city was
busy too. A lot of our young families made the decision
to leave their country homes and work near the mills,
freezing works, dairy factories etc and Auckland grew
like a mushroom. Houses were needed and our boys
were good at building. Reticulation of power and
telephone lines was a "family affair". Mike Tipene
remembers Uncle Dan Rapira reminding the young lads
that the good names of their families were at stake and
they had a proud record to keep up; no skiving off to the
pub or the T.A.B. Buck Tipene and his family got special
mention in the Power Boards bulletins. Ko wai ano? The
Clarke-Morungas, the Noa, Peita, Korewha families were
all valued workers.
We still liked our country food, kai moana and puha.
Many a family remembers going out on expeditions with
their kuia to pick watercress and puha. Granny would
organise the youngsters, each with a sugar bag, and off
they went on the tram. The little snobs sat at the far end
of the tram and pretended they didn't belong to kuia!
What if her shoes did have holes in them! They were
comfortable.

page 11

MILL HILL MISSIONARIES

St. Joseph's College, Mill Hill
In 1885 the Catholic Bishop of Auckland was a very
worried man. He had just a few priests for this huge area
from the north down to Taumarunui. So he wrote to Fr.
Vaughan (later Cardinal) who had started a little society
in the suburb of Mill Hill, north west London, about 20
years before.
Could they spare anybody to come out and minister to
the Maori people? He had only one old man in the north,
Pa Maketanara, who moved from settlement to
settlement
The young Society of St Joseph had undertaken work
in the deep south of USA and Borneo, but he could
spare a couple of priests for a start. So Fr. Becker (Pa
Hoane Papita) and Fr. Madan, (Pa Matana) were the first
Mill Hill men to come to Aotearoa. They arrived in 1886.
So began the relationship between Maori and Mill Hill
which has lasted for over a century. In fact we had a big
celebration at Te Unga Waka in 1986. This year too,
Motukaraka is celebrating 50 years since the death of Pa
Hoane Papita who is buried next to the Church which
stands on the hill, overlooking the Hokianga river.

MHM

Mill Hill 100 years in Aotearoa
Bishop De Wit with Frs Haring & Cushlow

This is not meant to be a history of the Society, just a
note to explain their position in the scheme of things. The
philosophy of the Society was well suited to the Maori
Mission. In the first Constitutions they were told to:
Learn the language of the people
Respect the tradition and culture
Be independent of any politics
Not buy land or property for themselves
Be ready to work with their hands so as not to be a
burden on the people.

Seeing off the Superior General at Whenuapai 1960
Frs O'Callaghan, McLoughlin (Sup.), Dean Alink,
Fr. Zanna
Mill Hill owes a lot to Holland. Many recruits came
from there to London, learning excellent English in the
process. More vocations came from there than from any
other country, but there are also many from Austria,
England, Ireland, Scotland and a few from Belgium,
USA, Wales, Argentina and now thank God, also from
Aotearoa. Up till now it has been Mill Hill policy not to
take recruits from mission areas. Any applicants were
encouraged to stay and work for their own people.
However in the last few years this has been changed and
now there are Africans and Indians and other tangata
whenua asking to join. Of course, if you join up with Mill
Hill you'll probably be sent to South America or
Phillippines or somewhere far from your own home -
that's the deal.

Seeing off the Superior at Auckland Airport. 1991
Frs. Cushlow, Laidler, McGill (Sup.), Logue, Br Bernard
Here is a list of Mill Hill Fathers appointed to Auckland
City, beginning with Fr. O'Callaghan (Pa Tewano) in
1947. Then fathers van Enckevort (Pa Matiu), Laidler,
Haring, Bierbooms, Tuerlings, O'Brien, Sloane, Wanders,
Aarts, Flannery, van Tilborg, Bachmann, Geboers, Mert-
ens, Goes, Bracken and Ryan. Some spent only a year
or two in the city, but there have been some long-serving
pastors.

page 12

RELIGIOUS ORDERS
We, in the city, have to thank the Religious Orders who
have appointed their members to assist in the work of
the Faith among the Maori people in Auckland. In the
early days, the main help came from the Sisters teaching
in the schools. They helped with the religious
instructions and did a certain amount of home visitation.
They gave their holiday time to run the Catechism
Camps. Many of our people attended schools run by the
Marist Sisters, the Sisters of Mercy or the Sisters of St
Joseph. St. Anne's Shelly Beach Road, was also a focal
centre, because many young Maori girls boarded there.
In more recent times, Sisters have been appointed by
the Orders for specific pastoral work in the city of
Auckland. The Sisters of the Mission from Hato Hohepa,
Crescentia, Phoebe, Mary Martin, Marie Chanel and
Marie Andre, have done valuable work, especially with
their contacts with the Hato Hohepa Old Girls. The St
Joseph's Sisters who have taught in our Maori schools
for ages, have become a strong part of our city team.
Sister Fidelis, with many years experience in the schools
of Panguru, Matata and Waihi-Tokaanu, adds a new
dimension to the work in the city. Sr. Marie Hogan was
with us for a while before being asked to work in
Taranaki. Sister Edith has now come back to us and is
"doing her thing - with guitar" in the Kohanga Reo of Te
Unga Waka.
The Sisters of Mercy have always given strong support
to our people, through the schools and in recent years,
by letting us have Sister Elizabeth (formerly Sister Zita)
as leader of the Tamaki Mission Team. They also
arranged for her to have a year of sacramental studies in
Dublin, which, unfortunately, coincided with Te Unga
Waka Jubilee Year.
The Marist Brothers, through their work at Hato
Petera, have always been ready to help Te Unga Waka.
The Dominicans have supported Fr Michael Shirres in
his many years of study at Auckland University,
specializing in Maori Spirituality, which is now coming to
fruition in Maori theology courses at Te Unga Waka.
Many thanks, Sisters, Brothers, Pirihi.

Sr Fidelis, Pa Ryan "Kei whea ra mama?"

DIOCESAN PRIESTS
Some people get very puzzled over the terms
Religious and Diocesan. Aren't all priests supposed
be religious? Without getting too complicated
Diocesan Priest is ordained for work in a particular area
under the authority of the Bishop. He would usually be a
local man but not always so.
A Religious Priest belongs to one of the Religic
Orders, (or Congregations or Societies). All these Roopu
have their own character and have usually been form
for a specific purpose; the members owe allegiance
each other and their Superior. Some specialize
education, others in giving Spiritual Retreats, others
working with racial groups. That is why, for example
Bishop Luck could invite the Mill Hill Fathers in 1885
and, more or less, leave the Maori work to them.
All missionary societies in the course of time try to
work themselves out of a job. They work so the work
eventually the people themselves will take over the work
That is why the Mill Hill Fathers were so happy when Pa
Wiremu was ordained, then Pa Henare and the others
who followed after him.

Nga pirihi Maori 1970
3 Marist Fathers, Karaitiana, Wiremu, Hemi
2 Diocesan, Pa Henare, Pa Rawiri

In the past the Bishop has appointed some of his
young priest-trainees to do six months or more with the
Tamaki Mission Team. That's how we got to know Pa
Pateriki Dunne, Pa Petera Hay-McKenzie and Pa Piripi
Sullivan. As well, each year, the Seminary course
includes Maori studies in culture and language; not
enough perhaps, but a help to greater understanding.  Of
course, there's no substitute for our own Maori
vocations. So we are praying and supporting Gerard
Patterson and Peter Tipene as they gradually get nearer
to the priesthood. (Peter's grandmother is mentioned
the article about the Legion of Mary. You can be sure
she is praying for her mokopuna.)
Pa Henare, of course, spent several years on the
Tamaki Mission Team, where he was a great influence
on the Youth, with Sports Teams and Social events.
Now, he's back again after ministering to the people
the north and Gisborne. 

page 13

LIVING CONDITIONS:
ENTERTAINMENT
There was no "square eye" looking at you in every house.
In fact at this time there was a lot of overcrowding. Dame
Whina and her helpers were assaulting the ears of
Government departments, especially the Maori Affairs to
know why it was so hard to get home-finances. In the end
Mr Corbett.
She got results by going direct to the Minister of Maori Affairs,
The overcrowding caused our people to find their amuse-
ments outside the home. When the youngsters came home
from school they ran off to play. If the family was religious,
they would have karakia in the evening. Sometimes they got
slack and it took a visit from the Legion of Mary to revive
family prayer, especially the Rosary.
No one had heard of "Teen-age Culture" yet. Records
were big 78s - no tapes or trannies or Walkmen. Popular
diversions at week-ends were Dances and Cinema. Quite
a few of our people began to show their natural talent for
music. They joined bands, played saxophones, steel and
Hawaiian guitars and sang, and sometimes did a few items
of Maori "culture".

Matiu Hotere and Partner Eva Rudolph -
runners-up in Dance Competition

KEEPING UP THE FAITH
The first Catholic Maori families in Auckland made sure
that their children got into Catholic schools and they
supported each other in the Faith. Then Pa Tewano came
to live in Ponsonby to look after the central city and the new
suburbs to the west. Three years later, Pa Matiu began
operating from Ellerslie, covering the new areas opening up
to the south.

Catechism Camps became popular. At first they went to
Knock-na-gree in Titirangi and later in Hato Petera in the 
school holidays. Some of these were really big with
children staying a week and 30 or 40 making
Communion.

The Sisters of the Mission give up holiday time to teach
the Catechism Camps. This one is at Hato Petera
During the fifties, the Mill Hill Fathers made a big effort to
send young priests to the Maori Mission:
Fr. Goboers from Tilburg, Netherlands
Fr. O'Brien from Cork, Eire
Fr. Bierbooms from Roosendaal, Netherla
Fr. Ryan from Merseyside, England
Fr. Horrigan from Lancashire, England
Fr. Logue from Glasgow, Scotland
Fr. Dijkman from Castricum, North Holland
Fr. Mertens from Limburg, Netherlands
Fr. Nielen from Wormeveer, North Holland
Fr. Bracken from Offaly, Eire

They were sent to Panguru, Pawarenga,
Waitaruke and Waihi-Tokaanu to learn from the
kaumatua Pa Aterea, Pa Teo, Pa Arapeta, Pa Hori and
Huperio. They not only learned te reo Maori, but also
a good understanding of tikanga Maori.

PA TEO WANDERS - HE PIRIHI MAIA
A great Maori speaker; he expected the young priests to be
the same.

page 14

VOCATION
In 1955 one of the students at Hato Petera College
decided to try for the priesthood. Henare Arekatera Tate
of Motuti, Hokianga offered his life as a pirihi. It was over
ten years since Pa Wiremu had been ordained as a
Marist Father. Henare wanted to become a priest of the
Diocese of Auckland to work among his own people. The
people were very happy; but luckily, they didn't get
carried away and try to make him Pope right away. In
fact, Henare was looking a bit apprehensively at the
years lying ahead. "Take your tennis racquet with you,"
said Pa Teo, "and the time will fly past." But it was a
tough time, being so far away from home. Holy Name
Seminary in Christchurch fro Philosophy studies and
Mosgiel, Dunedin for Theology.
ATTITUDES
Many Maori families in their early days in Auckland got
to know the local priests like Fr. Hyde of St. Benedicts.
They joined in school and church projects and felt they
belonged. All went well when they could sing the familiar
hymns and the Catechist could chant the Mass prayers
in Maori. The priest still said the Mass in Latin. But
Pakeha people were used to a silent Mass which they
followed with their books. And they wouldn't dream of
singing hymns without a choir and an organ to back
them up. So our lonely Maori family would feel strange
and often wouldn't return. Pakeha people couldn't
understand this. The priests too were sometimes hurt
and felt that anyone wanting something different must
be losing their Faith. To them the Mass was the Mass -
hoiano! So the two Missioners had to be very patient and
try to explain and help the Pakeha priests to understand
Maori feelings.
Monsignor Hyde and others like him were a great help.
His collection for the Maori Mission was the biggest just
about every year. He used to tell his people, "I want a
silent collection - never mind those coppers or shillings -
just let me hear the rustle of paper money!" Fr. Gardiner
of Panmure was another great helper who gave us his
hall for fund-raising.

321 MANUKAU ROAD

In 1959 Pa Matiu persuaded the Dean to buy a bigger
house for the Missioner, where people could meet on
comfort. Obviously too, there was going to be a need for
more priests to help in the work to meet the needs of the
growing Maori population. 321 Manukau Road belonged
to a Doctor. Owing to a court case, the house was up for
a quick sale. The house was a fine two-storey place, with
a big sitting room, and carpeted throughout. The Dean
was reluctant to use Maori Mission money for it, so he
bought it with money from Mill Hill. But he wanted Pa
Matiu to pull up the carpet, because Mill Hill Men were
not supposed to have such luxuries in their homes. So
Pa Matiu had to talk fast, to persuade him that it would
cost more to varnish the floors. Up to then it had been
the policy of the Society of St Joseph (Mill Hill) not to
purchase land or property.

First Communion Group at Hato Petera
Fr Haring, Fr O'Callaghan and the Marist Sisters

Sister M Chanel
Catechism Camp Musician

page 15

FUNDRAISING
Although it was still a couple of years away from Pa
Henare's ordination, some families in Panmure and Glen
Innes decided to start a fund for this important kaupapa.
It started in a small way among the families, - the
Daniels, Wihone, Shelford, Topia, Te Tai, King,
Wharewaka me etahi atu. Tarau and Kaho and Maisie
loved their cards and they were not the only ones. Dame
Whina, Manuka Henare (kaumatua), Henare Noa, Mrs.
Hughes (the jockey's mum), Koherangi and the Witanas
all enjoyed a bit of a gamble. What better excuse could
you have than the kaupapa of ordaining a priest? They
knew that Auckland would have to accommodate and
feed the crowds. There was not much doubt it would be
in Auckland, although they knew that Pa Teo in Panguru
would be fighting for it to be held there. After a time
when the money had grown it was suggested to Bishop
Liston that if there was some left over, it should form the
nucleus of a fund to help more Maori boys to study for
the priesthood. The Archbishop felt criticised "I will look
after any boy who wants to go to the Seminary, whether
he is Maori or Pakeha" he said. "Mmm. .. better put it
towards a Maori Catholic Centre."
Other areas began to join in the fund raising. Pa Kereti
Haring had now joined the team and he jokingly referred
to himself as Auntie Whina's taxi. "E Pa, what are you
doing? I want you to drop everything and come and take
me to Te Atatu ... to North Shore ... ki ko ... ki ko."
Housie had been legalised and games sprang up all over
the place. Dame Whina stirred them up. "E Whina how
come you know so many people?" asked Pa. "E Pa,
these are all my bones!"

QUEEN CARNIVAL
Why not unify these fund-raising activities by having a
Queen Carnival? Dame Whina had already been involved
in these for other projects. In fact Sir John Allum, then
Mayor of Auckland, had once said that Whina taught him
a lesson in fund-raising.

Seven groups formed :-
Cty 1, City 2, City 3,
Gien Innes-Panmure,
Westem Suburbs,
Manurewa-Clevedon,
South Auckland.
Each chose a pretty girl for
their Queen. The target
was 300 votes for each
Queen. (1vote=£1).
There were Dances
Basket-Socials, Hangis,
Bring and Buys, Raffles,
Card evenings. Anything
that would make money.

Queen Martha enjoys the moment.
Those first Queens still remember those days. The
had to work hard too, no queenly privileges for them.
They were:
Martha Karanga
Cecilia Lundon
Ngawini McMath
Maria Matthews
Barbara Mackie
Sarah Lundon
Dorothy Wihone
It was a ten week campaign, ending at midnight of
10th October. The Port Building Hall was the venue. All
through the evening money was handed in. Rumours
went back and forth. But Ngeungeu Zister was a shrewd
operator. She kept her group just ahead of the
opposition. People were turning out their pockets to see
if they could squeeze out a few more "votes" for their
Queen. But just before midnight, Ngeungeu slipped in
the last of her "votes". Pa Matiu rose amid a hushed
silence and read the total for each Queen. The
Manurewa-Clevedon group has made £976.10.3d.

The Queen-maker, Ngeungeu Zister
holds the golden orb for her winning Queen.

page 16

The next was City 2 with £715.3.4d. Martha Karanga
was declared elected with Cecilia Lundon the runner-up.
Can you still remember the old way of counting money?
To get an idea, remember that in the early nineteen
sixties an average weekly wage for a carpenter was £14,
for a farm labourer £7. The grand total for the campaign
was £4,190 - which was a lot of weeks wages.

The Runner-up Cecilia Lundon receives
a bouquet, cousin Sarah looks on.

The coronation took place a week later, in the Maori
Community Centre in Pitt Street. It might not have been
Westminster Abbey, but there was a real Archbishop to
do the crowning. For an hour and a half, each group
performed action songs, haka and poi and kept the
crowds in high spirits. Then Colonel Arapeta Awatere
went forward as Kaituki to challenge the Queen's party.
When Queen Martha was safely seated on her throne he
presented her with a ceremonial mere of authority. The
Archbishop then came forward to place the crown on her
head. She in turn presented him with a Treasure Chest
containing £2,000 as a "foundation stone" towards the
Centre. The rest was put aside for the expenses of the
Ordination.
Some of the Queen's were at the Silver Jubilee
celebration. Queen Martha Karanga left for Australia
some years ago and lives in Perth.
CENTRAL COMMITTEE
All this effort pulled the people together. A central
committee was formed with representatives from the
seven groups which had supported the different Queens.
This was to unify the efforts and oversee the
organisation. Dame Whina, Wiki Hotere and Pa Matiu
were the leaders.

Robbie (Sir Dove-Meyer Robinson) Mayor of
Auckland, is always ready to add his advice.

MISSION AT ST BENEDICT'S
As part of the spiritual preparation, Father Huia Hyde
suggested that St. Benedict's should be used for a
spiritual "Mission". Missions had already been held at St
Benedict's. It was big and central. But this one would be
specifically for Maori people to prepare them for the
ordination spiritual.
It was to run from Sunday, 29th April to Sunday, 6th
May. Priests from outside of Auckland were invited.
However, owing to sickness only Pa Kereti Cushlow was
available for all the week-day evening services. Everyone
liked his style of preaching with stories and jokes to
illustrate his points. But he confesses all these years
later, that it was a tough assignment. Liza Tipene and
her fellow Legionairies would all sit on the front rows,
drinking in every word. Every evening hundreds of
people came in,even from distant suburbs. The Legion of
Mary did a great job, delivering by hand over one
thousand invitations to every Catholic family in Auckland.
The priests on the scene were kept busy with the
sacrament of Reconciliation. And, over 700 came to
each of the two Sunday Masses.

Ngawini McMath represented City 3

page 17

RANGIMARIE
After all the fund-raising and entertaining during the
Queen Carnival, it was only natural that the supporters
should keep on practising waiata and haka. So they kept
on meeting at the home of Miria and Wiki, now living at
48 Wellington Street. Soon the old house began to creak
even more.
Because they came from different groups, the name
Hui Mai was suggested. Others favoured Kotahitanga.
But in the end Rangimarie (Peace) reflected the feelings
and desires of the whole group. So this became the
name, based on the saying of Jesus, "Ko te Rangimarie e
hoatu nei e ahau ki a koutou, ko taku Rangimarie."

Sonny Te Iri
Sonny Te Iri was chosen as Chairman, Pat Mendes,
Secretary, Father Haring as Chaplain and Eileen Kiwi as
Treasurer. There wasn't much treasure in the terms of
money, but there was plenty of treasure in the talents
they possessed. Miria with her lovely voice and happy
presence and leadership qualities, was a great asset.
Johnny Tapiata, also of Ngati Ranginui, had a happy
knack of producing new ideas and songs. Johnny was
studying at Auckland University and like all students was
always hungry. So naturally he found his way to the table
of his whanaunga, Miria. They would sit around humming
and strumming and in no time at all they had put new
words to old tunes and re-shaped them into beautiful
action-songs.

John Waititi (Whanau-a-Apanui) and John Tapiata (Ngati
Ranginui); two very inspirational people.

As the time came nearer for the ordination, more ar
more people joined the group. The year 1962 was th
crunch year. Johnny came up with a very special son!
"E Koro, Pa Henare e." He caught the spirit of th
occasion in the words, "Mauria mai ra nga taonga a .
Ariki ... kia puawaitia te purapura o te kupu a te Atua
He went over to Hato Petera and also taught it to th
boys, - words and actions.

Haka for the Coronation

Dame Whina had a big garage at her place in
Cockburn Street. This she offered for their practices. She
became their patroness; Totoni was patron and his sister
Maraea came up with the cookies. Dame Whina
encouraged the young people to come together and put
up a table tennis table for them.
The group was made up of very normal people, not
saints. There was plenty of raruraru and arguments and
differences of opinion. On many occasions the Chaplain
had to be the peacemaker. But having something definitive
to aim at was a great boost to their spirits.
By the beginning of 1962 it was definite that the
Ordination would be in Auckland. Pa Teo had argued for
Panguru, and it would have had special meaning for the
people of Tai Tokerau, but in the end, the weather and
Archbishop Liston decided. June is definitely the muddy
season in Hokianga and sometimes even the machines
doesn't get through owing to slips on the Skyline on
Runaruna. So it would have been an impossible task to
bring the hundreds of cars and buses over those roads
So Pa Teo graciously gave way, and was invited to give
the Kauwhau.

Hanna Kite & Martha Cash

page 18

THE UNIFORM
Rangimarie was having trouble with their uniform. The
first pari was a white poutama with a little white cross on
the black background. Miria was in bed sick at the time.
They brought the sample along and spread it on the end
of her bed. "The only things missing", she said, "is the
No te Hohonutanga!" (The De Profundis) That was the
end of that. In the end it came down to the night before
the Ordination. Pa Matiu finished a sample of the new
design and rushed it across town to Miria for her
approval. Everyone was happy with it. So it was back to
321 Manukau Road and "eyes down and sewing" with
Maria Parker, her daughter, Teresa (Puti) and Pa Matiu
himself, on his own machine. They worked into the night.

WHAKATAPUNGA HEI PIRIHI
Ordination day was a Saturday. You'd think it was the
final of the World Cup. Auckland was invaded. Hokianga
emptied out in buses and cars and jalopies and trains.
People came from Mosgiel and Christchurch and Bluff;
from Poneke and Otaki; from Wanganui River and
Taranaki; from Opotiki, Whakatane, Rotorua, Hastings,
Wairoa, Gisborne,
Ruatoria,

Taupo,

Taumarunui,

Tauranga, Waikato, ara, no nga Tai e Wha.
By 9 a.m. St Patrick's Cathedral and the Square were
packed. Hato Petera boys were lucky. They had been
given the important job of singing the most tapu hymn, -
"Veni Creator Spiritus" - which has been sung
unchanged for twelve centuries. So the choir loft was left
vacant for them.

Across the square and through the crowd came the
Cross-Bearer and acolytes, followed by a procession of
seventy priests, in black and white kakahu pirihi. Then
followed Archbishop James Michael Liston, Bishop (later
Cardinal) Delargy and Bishop Foley of Fiji. Then came
the four young candidates, in white albs, Henare Tate,
Denis Browne (now Bishop of Auckland), David Welch
and Nick Alleman.
The age-old ceremony, all in Latin, was very serious
and very impressive. Spiritual taonga were given to these
young men: to bring Christ to their people in the
Eucharist and Reconciliation, and by their preaching of
the Good News. All the priests went forward to place
their hands on the heads of each of the four. And there
was and audible sigh from the whole cathedral when Pa
Wiremu, the first Maori priest, stood before Pa Henare to
pass on his own mana pirihi.
At the end, Monsignor Curran stood up and
announced, "Please, could we have just the close
families of the new priests to come forward for their first
blessings." What a laugh! Everyone stood up and
advanced en masse on poor Pa Henare. Eventually,
sanity prevailed and the newly ordained priests were
escorted across to Liston House for some breakfast. All
had been fasting from the night before.

Archbishop Liston advised that Pa Henare should
have a quiet day in seclusion. He was still under a
spiritual tapu and the time to give himself to his people
was after he celebrated his first Holy Mass. So he spent
the rest of the day quietly at his old school, Hato Petera.

The crowds in the city were given a buffet lunch at the
Catholic Social Centre, Pitt Street. Then in the evening,
the Rangimarie gave the performance of their lives. Every
item was cheered and especially Johnny Tapiata's song,
"E Koro, Pa Henare e."

page 19

TE MIHA TUATAHI
On Sunday again it was unbelievable. The Cathedral
and Square were thronged with people. How wonderful
the old hymns sounded, - Aroha Mai, e Hehu atawhai, -
E Hehu i te Tapenakara ... "I was watching the roof!"
said Archbishop Liston, "in case it lifted off!"
"He mamae, he mamae!" were the opening words of
Pa Teo's kauwhau, as he thought of all the loved ones
whom death had called away before they could share in
this happy moment. At the end of the Mass, Pa Matiu
climbed up into the old pulpit, "Inaianei, me haere tatou
ki te Trades Hall." This somehow tickled the fancy of the
youngsters and for days afterwards you could get a
laugh by saying, "Haere tatou ki te Trades Hall."

Pa Matiu, Pa Henare, Pa Tewano leaving the Cathedral

The hall was turned into a marae and Dame Whina and
Pa Kereti Aarts came forward with the challenger to
meet Pa Henare. The kaumatua, Manuka Henare stood
up ki te hiki i te tapu - to lift the tapu from Pa Henare and
his ope. The cake stood there in all its glory, the corners
patterned like wheat and grapes, symbolizing the
Eucharist. In its centre was a waka with a net of fish and
the words, "E Pa Henare, tukua tou kupenga ki te wahi
hohonu." (let down your net into the deep water).

E koro, Pa Henare e.
Kai puawaitia te purapura

After the first ritual speeches, Wiki had the job of
explaining the procedures for Kai. There had to be
several sittings, each one could hold 410 people. So
different coloured tickets were issued for differerent
sittings. The V.I.P.s were given Blue tickets for the first
sitting. "Haere mai nga tikiti puruu!" (Come on Blue
Tickets!) was like saying, Come on Blue Bloods! We had
a good laugh, but Wiki was very patient. Eventually the
first sitting went up the road to the old wooden hall (long
since disappeared to make way for the motorway
junction). Feeding your manuhiri has always been
serious business in Maoritanga. A lot of food was
donated, sacks of kutai and pipi, kumara and potatoes,
dozen poaka, a hundred and fifty chickens etc. etc ... a
van had been hired to go round collecting the gifts for
food.
While each sitting got down to the serious business of
eating, the others fulfilled the whakatauki, "Ko te kai a te
rangatira, he korero." They used the Trades Hall as the
marae to mihi, to waiata or just ki te noho noaiho. The
wardens from the seven Committees of the Queen
Carnivals made sure that everything went smoothly, with
great teamwork. There were no grumbles or grouses
Everyone had smiles, even the dishwashers who were in
it up to their elbows, from 1 o'clock till after 5 p.m.
In the afternoon Dame Whina presented Pa Henare
with the tohu aroha from the people. It was a chalice of
gold and greenstone. The cup and the foot were made of
gold, the central knob and the cross on the foot were
made of pounamu. Rangimarie sang "E Koro" and "Te
Hahi Katorika hei arataki." Everyone cried, it was s
moving. After the great orators had spoken, and Dame
Whina had issued her challenge, all eyes turned on the
young man who was the cause of it all. Pa Henare
looked so young and vulnerable, but he was equal to the
occasion. Without any tricks of oratory he began very
simply with the whakapapa of his spiritual descent from
Pompallier, and his debt to his human family and to Pa
Wiremu, who need be mokemoke no longer. Then he
translated it all into English. And he didn't forget to thank
the "powerhouse", te Tari o te Ora (Health Department)
otherwise known as Nga Ringa Wera. He went to all the
cooks and workers and gave each his First Blessing.

Sonny Te Iri receives the Rangimarie slice of the cake

page 20

Nga Pihi Maori

Tana kupu whakahoki

Pa Henare gives his first blessing to staff at the Mater Hospital

Weka, Joy, Winiata, Josephine, Tiniwa, Sonny

Billy Ngaropo, Josephine Te Iri (Williams) Winiata Hotere

Whina takes the cake

The Girls of Marist School. Pa Petera looks on.

Shirley, Weka, Bernadette
waiting in the wings.

Joy Hotere, Josephine, Martha Cash

page 21

AFTERMATH
The euphoria carried over from the day of the
ordination. In modern psychology they would say we
were "bonded". Ki ta te reo Maori, kua honoa tatou i a
tatou hei whanau kotahi. To keep us united we needed
another objective, and we had this in our sights, - our
Maori Catholic Centre. Some critics say we should have
thought "Marae" instead of "Centre" and then we would
have had our Meeting House first. It may be true, but we
were trail blazers for the city Maori. All the marae that we
knew belonged to individual hapu. First and foremost we
wanted a place where we belonged, where we could kick
up our heels and dance and sing and play games. We
had learned from the ordination that it was important to
have your own hall and Turangawaewae.
So the momentum carried on with Housie, Socials,
Bring and Buys, Gambling (tut, tut!), legal raffles, illegal
raffles. "Why not have a Queen Carnival for the little girls!
Something short and sweet! Ha, ha!" So, in October, 47
little Princesses were sponsored by their families and
friends. The target set for each was £10, because it
would be a very short campaign for two weeks.
Once more it was hustle and bustle, rushing here and
there; croaky voices from smoke-filled Bingo sessions,
"gamblers fingers" from spinning wheels and dealing
cards; tired feet and tired eyes. Dame Whina was busy
organising the spectacle. She had Joe Te Awhitu making
the throne and thronelets. Rangimarie even made a trip
to Thames to support Rose Marie Coromandel (Lulu
Anderson's mokopuna). In the end, the Thames group
triumphed and little Rose Marie led the procession into
the Coronation. She had a train 52 feet long carried by
the other 46 Princesses.

There were trumpets and drums to give the 
appropriate fanfares. They were played by St. Peter's
Epsom. Pa Kereti Aarts in red sash and black soutane
performed the Coronation. Never mind that the crown fell
off the first time. It didn't faze the young Queen at all.
She was only four years old. Elizabeth Shelford of
Manurewa and Maraea Matthews from the city were the
runners-up. In just two weeks they had raised £1,466.
(Extract from Te Waka o Hato Petera, Dec. 1962)
For the record and that future generations may know
the names of those who made this a carnival with a
difference, we give the names of the Princesses, their
sponsors in brackets, and place of origin. All deserve to
be recorded for their wonderful efforts.
Rose Marie Coromandel, winner (Lulu Anderson
family), Thames.
Elizabeth Dawn Shelford, runner-up (Shelford, Beazley
Daniels families), Panmure.
Maraea Matthews (Mrs Taupo Delich, Gilbert, Matiu
Hunia, Peita, Kingi and Wilson), City.
Carol White (Mrs Cash and family), City.
Janette (Mrs Lora Peri), City.
Lilian (Mrs Adams and family), City.
Josephine Cooper (Mrs Whina Cooper and families)
City, Panmure, Glen Innes.
Maraea (Mrs Rapira and family, Campbell family and S.
Te Whiu), Titirangi.
Josephine (Mrs Makiri and family), New Lynn.
Margaret (Mrs Dixon and Moses), City
Nane (Ye Awhitu families), Manurewa, Titirangi, Ellerslie
Marama (Harris, Lundon, Davis families), Avondale and
New Lynn.

Fr Arts crowns little Queen Rosemarie

page 22

The Mini Queen today

Aotea (Mrs M Toko and family), City.
Margaret Mary (Kite family), North Shore, and (Gilbert
Family), City.
Marilynn (Dunn and Thomas Families), Glen Innes,
Ruawai.
Regina (Mendes family), Grey Lynn, Henderson, Glen
Innes.
Tina Maria (Mrs Martha Cash), City.
Bernadette (Mr & Mrs J. Harris), Manurewa.
Christine (Topia-Wharewaka family), Owairaka.
Josephine Caroline
(Noa family),
Meadowbank,
Onehunga, Otara.
Janette (Morunga family), Mt Roskill.
Maria (Witana-Akutina and family), Papatoetoe.
Peggy (Hovell and Rini), Glen Innes
Mary (J. Witana and family), Glen Innes.
Tuhoe (Te Tai family), Sandringham, Glen Innes.
Ella (Hayes-Oneroa family), Titirangi, Glen Innes.
Ada (Ruka, Pomare families), Mt Roskill.
Moana (Mutu family), City.
Isabella (Cassidy family), Papatoetoe.
Zelma Dawn (Tito family), Ponsonby.
Maria (Mr & Mrs Larkins), Otara.
Curly Mary Smith (Waharai family), Otahuhu, Glen Innes.
Annie (Ike Topia), Otara.
Cecilia (Tipene family), New Lynn.
Isabelle (Mr & Mrs D King), Manurewa.
Elizabeth (Mr & Mrs Hansey), Otahuhu.
Polly (Dunn, Campbell families), Otara.
Barbara Ann (Hoera), Otara
Mihi (Wilson and Pai family), City, Mangere.
Janette (Mrs Henry and family), Glen Innes.
Mary (Katipa and Matthews families), Manurewa,
Papatoetoe.
Mary Ann (Broughton & Sarich) Otara, Papatoetoe.
Faith Greenfield (Hotere family), Panmure, City, Mt.
Roskill.
Chanel (Wijohn family), Glen Innes.
Shirley Ann (B Butler family) Avondale, Glen Innes.
Teresa (Mrs Ngawha Topia), Papatoetoe.
Laura (Mrs White), City

After the success of the mini-Queens, teenage
Princesses were the obvious follow-up. This time it was
a longer campaign, with 16 groups taking part. It was a
very close contest. Panmure-East Coast won by £1,060
over South Auckland's £1,000. Third was North Shore.
Mary Shelford was crowned in the Auckland Town Hall
by Archbishop Liston. John Turei presented her with a
greenstone mere and Mayor Robbie had plenty to say.
The campaign lasted seven weeks. A total of £8,000 was
raised by the Queen and the following 15 contestants:
Mary Tate (South Auckland), Shirley Kite (North Shore),
Mary Topia
(Ellerslie-Onehunga), Maureen Beck
(Otara-Papatoetoe),
Carol Nepia (Avondale-New
Lynn-Blockhouse Bay), Margaret Manuel (Otahuhu),
Annie Martin (Mitimiti), Donna Mclntosh (King
Country-Waikato), Nellie Sllver (Glen Innes), Elizabeth
Topia (City), Ailleen Sampson (Mt Roskill), Marie Erickson
(United), Ruth Smith (Maori W.W. League), Johanna
Winiata (Pawarenga) and Winifred Hayes (Catholic
Youth).

page 23

Why limit it to the girls? Why not have a
Prince/Princess Carnival? By this time it is well
recognised that "whanau-power" will get people going,
more than anything else. So this time there were fifty
family groups taking part. You have to admire the
supporters. They had other projects going on, to support
marae, schools and parishes back home in the country
districts. Pat Mendes, for example, and Ngai Tupoto
were saving up for the new marae at Motukaraka and
they also put on a Queen Carnival for that. It was
certainly a time for unselfish action.
The winner this time was Haupuru, mokopuna of
Auntie Puti, son of Weka and Edward. The Vicar General
did the honours this time, Monsignor Cahill looked
splendid in his robes. The effort raised another £7,500.

Haupuru on the throne

PASTORAL WORK
In case you think that all other work stopped to make
way for fund-raising, here are a couple of extracts from
Te Waka o Hato Petera for October 1964. (This was a
monthly magazine published by the Mill Hill Fathers
about Maori-Hahi activities; price 1/6d = 15c.)
A Catechism camp for Maori children from the city and
suburbs was held at Knock-na-Gree, from August 29 to
September 4. It is an ideal spot for such camps. Situated
on the outskirts of Glen Eden, in a bushy, secluded area,
it soon makes one forget the busy, noisy city ... There is
a little convent for the Marist Sisters who come for the
week; and a one-room bach, known for some reason at
the Vatican, in which the priest stays. Last, but not least,
there is the dining room and kitchen under the
supervision of Mrs Hayden and five girls from Mt Albert
Marist School.
On Thursday and Friday, 23 of the 50 children
received the Sacraments for the first time
Reconciliation and Holy Communion, and a girl aged 12
was baptised.
(The same report goes on to speak of Legion of Mary
activities and the Ladies' Retreat at the Cenacle. But, of
course, fund-raising had to be mentioned:) ... "Among
the many activities going on to raise funds for the new
Maori Centre are: - Housie-housie session held twice a
week, on Thursday nights at the Catholic Hall, Ellerslie,
and on Friday afternoons from 12 to 3 pm in the Labour
Party rooms, opposite the C.P.O. in Queen Street; and
weekly dances in Glen Innes.

The Auckland Catholic Maori Cultural Group, "Te
Rangimarie", continues its concerts around the city. To
mention but three, concerts have been given to spastics and
the children of the Kelston School for the Deaf & Dumb
and the Old Folks. All concerts have been highly
successful. They are now planning a concert to be given
in Whangarei, where a big bazaar, sponsored by the
local Catholic Maori, is to be held to help raise funds for
the new Catholic Maori Centre in Auckland.

Building Te Unga Waka

OLD BAKERY IN EPSOM
During 1962 and 1963 three possible buildings were
looked at, but they were either too cramped, too
expensive or in an awkward place for parking and
access. Then towards the end of 1964 the old Gold
Krust Bakery was offered for sale. It had been damaged
by fire and looked a real mess. The girders looked rusty
and shaky. But there was plenty of room to build a hall
and other areas that could be renovated. The Committee
looked it over a few times and compared it with other
sites and possibilities.

Building the stage

page 24

To make sure of the safety aspects, Pa Matiu got K.
Tapper to look it over. Ken was a building engineer who
had recently been very helpful to the Catholics of
Rotorua in building the new St Michael's church. Now he
advised about the safety aspects and urged Pa Matiu to
go ahead. There were conferences with the town
planner, Mr Butterworth and with Mr Milne, the Mayor of
One Tree Hill

They were very helpful and became great
friends of Te Unga Waka. Graham Smith was chosen as
the architect and he treated it as a personal challenge to
develop the site.
Pa Matiu began to make a list of people who helped
and in the last year of his life, he wanted to make a role
of honour, so that no one would be forgotten. However,
death intervened; so perhaps we are just meant to
remember them in our prayers.


Before the new hall could arise, there was a lot of
cleaning up and demolition work to be done It was
hoped to have the opening before Christmas 1965, but
that was too optimistic. It was also realised that the
making of the Chapel would take more planning and
time.

MARCH 5th 1966
This date was chosen so that the Governor General
Sir Bernard Fergusson could officiate and Archbishop
Liston could bless the Centre. Sir Bernard had a lot of
real aroha for Maori people. He had learned Maori as a
lad in the 1920s, when his father, Sir Charles was
Governor General.
Once more, all Maori roads led to Auckland. Of course
it didn't have the same impact as the Ordination, but
over 2,000 gathered, many of them representing other
Churches and Tribal groups.

Pa Petera Bierbooms had just joined the team and he
took over the crowd management with his walkie-talkie-
and observation post in the upper dormitory. Clyde
Street was closed and the Traffic Cops and Maori
Wardens did a great job, keeping all in order until the
challenge could be made and accepted.

"Most of the troubles
since the races, Maori
and Pakeha first met
and mingled, have
arisen out of nothing
more
sinister
than
ignorance of
each
other

" (Young
people) I wish you
well, as you take over
the
torch
O
Christendom
and
Maoridom."

2,000 people sat down to lunch. In the afternoon there
was a Concert, in the evening a Ball. The following day
(Sunday) the Tumuaki of the Maori Mission, Fr Aarts,
said the first Miha Maori in the Hall, after which 500 sat
down to kai.
As Iriaka wrote in the Visitor's Book, "He Taonga Pai".
We have a real treasure. Since that day it has become
more so with the passing years. The number of our loved
ones who have lived, worked and spoken on the marae
of Te Unga Waka and then rested there when their
earth's journey was over, have made it a place of honour
and tapu.

Henare Graham, the challenger.
Young guard of honour from Manurewa.

Gov. Gen., Sir Bernard Ferguson,
Bp Delargy, Bp Liston

page 25

E te hunga kua moe i te moenga roa, haere ki te
okiokinga. Anei au tamariki, mokupuna, e mihi tonu ana
ki a koutou, mo te taonga o Te Unga Waka i tukua iho ki
tenei whakatupuranga. Haere ki te marae tuturu, ki te
marae tu tonu, tu tonu, ki te marae o to tatou Kaihanga.
Haere haere haere.
Tena ano tatou, nga kanohi ora, nga morehu o ratou
kua wheturangitia. Me hikoi whakamua tatou, me tautoko
i nga mahi me nga taonga i tukua iho ki a tatou. Tena
koutou tena koutou tena koutou katoa.
J. and L. de Bres, Maori Synod, Presbyterian
Church
Irikia Ratana, M.P. for Western Maori
Matiu Rata, M.P. for Northern Maori
Dr. and Mrs McElroy, Mayor of Auckland
Mr and Mrs Algie, Speaker of Parliament
Erin and Mrs Gowing, Anglican Bishop of
Auckland
John and Mrs Rae, Minister of Housing
Mr and Mrs Milne, Mayor of One Tree Hill
H. Bowman, repr. Moderator
Auckland

Presbytery
Bishop Delargy, Auxiliary Bishop of Auckland
Mr and Mrs Orr, Methodist Church
Eunice and Charles Nieukerke, International
Friendship League
(Legible signatures on page one of the Visitors Book.)

PA HANI

Pa Hani & Molly Houpapa

I would like to join you in the spirit of happiness at this
time. For many years Te Unga Waka was my home. Like
any home, we had our good times and bad, times where
feelings got hurt and other times the loyalty of so many
helped us forget the difficult times. I would like to thank
those who have grown in stature and leadership qualities
over the years. They help to make the work a lot easier
to overlook the shadows and forget the tears.
So many families have benefited spiritually, materially
and from the moral support given by Te Unga Waka and
from all the operations which were based there. I would
like to wish you all many more years of happy progress.
One incident comes back to mind which might have
some application now. One evening at Rangimarie
practice, news came that John McKay of Hillsborough
had died. We all decided to go as a group to the
Requiem Mass. But on the day of the funeral Molly
Houpapa picked up the phone in the Credit Union Office
and heard John's voice, talking to her and asking for
loan. She was absolutely stunned, and it took a while to
convince her that he wasn't talking from heaven! (The
mix up was caused by someone of the same name dying
in that parish.)
So don't let anyone write off Te Unga Waka. It's stil
got a lot of life left in it yet.
No reira, kia kaha, kia maia, kia manawanui.

Sr Fidelis, June, Pa Hani, Sr Elizabeth.

page 26

Miria and Wiki
TRIBUTE TO WIKI
"Kei hea ke a Wiki?" This was a question heard often
during the Silver Jubilee celebrations. It was the first
question of visiting priests who remembered Wiki as our
main speaker and host. "How is his health now?"
To the young people - Tena ra koutou te Rangatahi - I
would like to introduce you to Wiki Hotere and tell you
some of his achievements over the years. Some years
back Wiki suffered a stroke that almost killed him. He
struggled back from that sickness, but these days he
finds it hard to cope with crowds. But he asked me to tell
you that you were all in his thoughts and prayers at this
time.
Wiki is one of the enormous Hotere family who have
been great supporters of the Hahi Matua for many
generations. His father was Hipiriona William Barney of
Matihetihe, Te Rarawa & Ngati Whatua. He was working
in the gumfields, age 16, when he eloped with Akinihi,
from Whirinaki. She was only 15. But love conquers all.

They married and raised a family of ten boys and one
girl. Barney, as he was known to all, was one of that
tough breed of men, the bullock driver. The advent of the
tractor meant there was very little work for the bullock
teams. I once watched a team of six bullocks pulling a
small house onto a barge at Whakarapa. How smoothly
they worked! What a pity such artistry disappeared! But
life moves on, and Barney and Akinihi moved with the
family to Taumarunui to find suitable work.
It was good training in Tikanga Maori for the young
family to grow up among Ngati Maniapoto and Ngati
Tuwharetoa, with customs markedly different form
Hokianga. This experience would stand Wiki in good
stead, as he travelled the country later in his work for the
Faith.

Dave, Charlie, Wiki, Matiu, Barney and Dick with
their only sister Maria and first husband Dennis.

Eventually, in 1951, the family moved to Auckland
where there was work on the wharves. They were also
welcomed by the growing Catholic Maori community.
They were trained Katekita who could lead the Karakia o
te Miha and all the other community prayers. (Without
the need for a book!) Wiki became more and more a
spiritual leader in the days of the Miha Maori in St
Patrick's school in Wellington Street.
On January 15th, 1953, Wiki and Kohumiria (Nepia) of
Ngati Ranginui were married in St Pat's Cathedral with
Pa Tewano officiating. The Reception was held at the
Maori Community Centre in Fanshawe Street.

Miria & Wiki's Wedding

Miria was not only a wonderfully kind person, but she
was a great inspirer of people and she had a glorious
voice. When Barney senior died in 1954 Miria led us in
the No te hohonutanga. There were more than twenty
priests at the Requiem Mass and none of us will forget
the sound of her voice echoing through the Cathedral.
They set up house in Wellington Street. It was not very
flash, but it was a centre to which the young people
gravitated. They were both involved in the Legion Of
Mary and did a lot of work, visiting homes and praying
with families, keeping them in touch with their Faith.

Pa Tewano & Catherine

Wiki & Pa Tewano

page 27

When the Auckland Catholic Maori Society was
formed in 1961, Wiki was chosen as Secretary. Dame
Whina was President for the first five years, till after the
opening of Te Unga Waka. She then had to give up,
owing to so many other commitments. Laurence
Petricevich took over for a couple of years with Wiki as
Secretary. When Laurence retired, Wiki was elected
President, with Tai Patrick as Secretary.

At Youth Ball: Wiki & Whina, Pa Henare,
Joe Cooper, Jack Russell, Teresa Makiri
In these years a lot of changes were taking place in
the Church. In 1962 Pope John 22nd called the first
session of the Vatican Council. The Whanau of Jesus
from all round the World, represented by the Bishops,
took a completely fresh look at the way we were
presenting Jesus and his message. The Maori world had
received the message of Christ, clothed in the words and
ideas of the nineteenth century. And the priests still had
to use the ancient colonial language of the Roman
Empire, namely Latin. The Council decreed that local
languages could and should be used.
The Auckland Bishops leaned heavily ion the Auckland
Catholic Maori Society to give them good advice with
regard to Maori input into the liturgy. Cardinal Delargy
and, after him, Bishop John Mackey would ring up Wiki
or call him for consultation.

NE UNGA WAKA

Wiki welcoming Jack Farrell,
the Chairman of the Auckland Pastoral Council

We have grown used to the changes now, but thing
like evening Masses, joining in prayer with people
other faiths, the removal of the regulations about fasting
and abstinence from meat, more positive stress on
personal prayer and studies of Holy Scripture, etc, etc
were all making us feel a bit insecure. To some it meant
the END - the Rock of Peter was crumbling! To others it
meant a fresh wind was blowing the cobwebs away. To
others it meant "Do What You Like". Now Wiki had to
face up to these attitudes. With June Mclntosh they were
representatives on the Commission of the Laity in 1970
This was a nation-wide Commission. It then became
obvious that the Maori people needed to have their own
national group to advise the Bishops and Church
Leaders, This was inaugrated in 1972 with Wiki as the
first Chairman.

A meeting of the executive members of the Diocesan
Maori Council in Te Poho o Rawiri, Gisborn.
Pa Henare, Barney Houpapa, Wiki Hotere, Fr McKillop
Ruby Wawatai, Sam Gardner, Fr J Nielen, John Williams
A Parker (Chairman of the Parish Council), P Douglas,
M. Mclntyre.

But it was a sad year for Wiki. Miria had been fighting
cancer for many months and in November she gave up
the unequal fight and went to join her loved ones ki tua
te arai.
There was such a crowd at the Requiem Mass we has
to have it in the Hall. Wiki read the lesson with such
emotion and meaning that there wasn't a dry eye among
the listeners. And at Waikumete we sang all the songs
that she had taught us. The hymns and songs went on
and on. No one wanted to leave.
Panapa was thirteen and Catherine just ten at the
time. It was good that Auntie Cecilia Lundon was on
hand to help with their upbringing.

Family with Sister Marie Chanel

page 28

Miria praying
Wiki continued the work of the Legion of Mary with
meetings at their home in Astley Avenue. He still
travelled to meetings as Chairman of the Maori Pastoral
Diocesan Council, facing up to several important issues.
Over and over he stressed that the Maori people must
take responsibility for their own spiritual needs.
At this time the whole Catholic Church was busy
getting people to understand that lay people have a
crucial role in the life of Faith. Less candidates were
coming forward to be priests, and the Mill Hill Fathers
were not able to keep up their numbers. This was a
blessing in disguise. As long as there were plenty of
priests, with Nuns and Brothers to teach, the people
were content to leave everything to them - spiritual
welfare, education, rites and rituals, prayer, biblical
studies and sometimes even political and social issues.

The Family Group

Charile & Aunt Hilda

While trying to persuade the people to be more
independent in their minds, Wiki feels that he may have
overstepped the bounds of tapu and that this may be the
cause of the semi-paralysis from which he suffers.
Perhaps there were too many conflicting areas which
Wiki tried to reconcile in his own person., He certainly
didn't consider his own health as he went around like a
modern-day Saint Paul, staying weeks in some parishes
to explain the message.

If one reads the minutes of the Pastoral Council in
those years, both Regional and National, one sees a
wide variety of topics :- Community Priests, education in
general, education in Maoritanga, the meaning of a
Vocation, relationship with Parishes and the Hierarchy,
Katekita/Kaiarahi, politics and the right of protest.
One of the biggest problems was to persuade people
to actually study the situation. Why should they bother?
Weren't the delegates elected to do that?

Keeping watch over the casket of St Peter Chanel

In 1977 Wiki stepped down from the Chairmanship of
the Diocesan Maori Pastoral Council. Younger leaders
were coming forward with their own ideas. But Bishop
Mackey asked Wiki to accept the honorary title of
President of the Council. He could thus feel part of the
work while handing over the heavier burden to Harry
Semmens.

page 29

Bishop Vercoe, Cardinal Williams,
Wiki - welcome to Pope John Paul

Is that the end of the story? Life isn't like a soap
opera. Wiki continued his work at Te Unga Waka, again
and again trying to help reconcile past and present,
radical and conservative. His health waxed and waned.
Some days were good, others not so good. He had to
slow down and try to keep within the limits of his
strength.
We owe a debt of gratitude to Wiki. His life of service
is an example to us all. We thank Catherine and her
husband Bunny, for looking after our "elder statesman".
May he enjoy many years still.

Wiki's patron - Maori Madonna and Child,
painted by Sister Mary Lawrence

Hoi ano; kei te mihi tonu tatou ki tenei kaumatua
humarie. Kia ora koe, e Wiki, kia whakapaingia koe e to
tatou Ariki me tona Whaea aroha hoki, Hata Marie. Kia
ora koe mo au mahi nunui i nga tau kua pahure. Tena
koe, tena koe, tena koe.

Te hariru a Wiki ki a Hoane Paora

Miria and son Edward

House Mass for Hotere family

page 30

KI TA TE WAHINE TITIRO

E te whanau Maori e noho nei ki Akarrana, tena koutou
katoa. Ko te reo wahine tenei e mihi atu nei ki a koutou
katoa i tenei tau tiuperi. He wa whai tikanga tenei, te
huringa tau, rua tekau ma rima, o te whakapuaretanga o
Te Unga Waka. No reira, tena koutou, tena koutou, tena
koutou katoa.
I welcome this opportunity to speak to our people
from a woman's point of view. As our whakatauki says:
He putiputi kei a ia ano tona kakara, (Each flower has its
own fragrance). Or, in that other well known saying: Ko
tou rourou, ko taku rourou, ka ora te manuhiri, (With your
basket and my basket the guest will be satisfied).
Our elders and our pirihi have said many times that Te
Unga Waka owes much to the efforts of the women. In
the Maori would and also in the Pakeha world, men are
getting used to the idea that the women can have a
leadership role every bit as powerful as that of the men.
Some men need a fright to shake them up, or wake them
up, but we are making progress. On this occasion I
would like to think of our influence at Te Unga Waka as
being "Mother's influence". Men relate more easily to
their mothers! From their earliest years they have
depended in mother's voice, her commands and
decisions, so they find it easier to be told what to do by
a motherly figure instead of by an awe-inspiring female.

Liza Tipene, Teresa Makiri,
Frances Cook, Eve Gallen (Te Tana), Whina Cooper,
Maria Parker.

TE ROPU WAHINE MAORI
TOKO I TE ORA
Maisie Shelford, Frances Cook,
June Mcintosh, Tatiana Thompson,
Sarah Hotere, Eva Gallen,
Maria Parker, Ka Corbett.

My first mihi goes to the "powerhouse" of Te Unga
Waka, to those unsung heroes and heroines who
prepare and cook and serve and wash up and do all the
jobs to feed the crowds. This was wonderful to see
during the Jubilee week. Each whanau took a day to be
hosts and caterers. I mihi to all those who have been the
backbone of Te Unga Waka over the years.
Ko etahi o ratou kua ngaro atu i te kanohi tangata.
Tears come to the eyes when one thinks of the lovely,
helpful people who toiled in the kitchen, but have now
gone to our real home. Haere atu ra koutou ki te Huinga
o te Kahurangi. Haere atu ki te kainga tuturu. Kahore o
reira hiakai, kahore he roimata, kahore he mamae.
Nohoia te rangatiratanga o te rangi i whakaritea mo
koutou. Haere, haere, haere.
Perhaps I can begin with the establishment of the
Maori Women's Welfare League at Te Unga Waka. The
date was 17th December 1967. Ka Corbett was
President, Dame Whina was Patron, Tatiana Thompson
was Secretary, Maria Parker was Treasurer. Others
present were Frances Cook, Api Toia, Raiha Tipene,
Barbara Wilson, Eve Te Tana, Liza Harema, Winnie Te
Tai and myself.

Maori Women's Welfare League, Te Unga Waka.
Isobel, Tatiana, Ka, Marie, Whina Winnie, Frances,
Puti, Winnie Cooper, Liza
Our first efforts were very "down to earth". We began
with a "cooking day" at the Youth Hostel in England St,
Ponsonby. We were dedicated to improving the health
and welfare of the Maori. Our work in the first year was
mainly helping sisters like Betty Wark, cleaning her Boys
Hostel in Wellington Street, welcoming groups of Maori
girls on their first visit to the City, and in general working
in quiet ways to support our people.

page 31

Some distinguished guests came to our first birthday
party. I remember the cake was cut by Mrs Nieukerke,
International President of the Pan Pacific and South East
Asia Women's Organisations.

June, Ka, Mrs Nieukerke, Frances

I enjoyed the Maori Women's Welfare League, I
enjoyed working for our people and the company of
Maori women. But, the spiritual aspect is missing. This is
League policy, so that people from different religions can
work together. I had been a member of another League,
the Catholic Women's League, in Blockhouse Bay where
we were living at the time.
In that group the spiritual aspect was missing. Very
few Maori ladies felt at home with the formality and
paper-work which seems to be necessary in a Pakeha
setting. So a couple of us went to see Bishop Mackey to
ask him if we could set up a Maori branch of the Catholic
Women's League. "No, it's racism, June!" he said. "No,
Bishop, it isn't! We want to do it our way, in our culture."
That stopped him, and after a moment's thought he said,
"I see what you mean." After that he was most helpful.
At this time we were learning what race relations
meant. Some of our best friends took a while to see the
difference between racism and living, praying and
meeting in our own culture. Bubbles and I went to see
Father Jim McGrath, whether we could have a Maori
Mass in St Mary's, Avondale. Pa Tewano encouraged us
to go along. Fr McGrath threw us out! He said, "Out! Out!
That's racism."
When we got back home to Bubble's place, we rang Pa
Tewano. "He threw us out!" "Ah" he said, so gently,
"Don't worry. I'll go along and have a talk with him." And
the most embarassing day of my life was next day, when
I came out of work. There was Fr McGrath waiting for
me, and he said,"Can I talk to you June?" and he went
on, "I want to apologise to you for last night." I felt really
sorry for him. I said, "Oh, Father ...! " but from that time
on, he really opened the doors. You wouldn't find a more
helpful priest in the whole of Auckland. Their trouble
was, they had not had much association with taha Maori
and that's why they looked on it with suspicion at first.

So we started the Auckland Catholic Maori Women's
League. Our motto: Te Whakapono, Te Tumanako me Te
Aroha. Sister Marie Chanel was our first President and
we had over twenty-five members. At first the rest of the
C.W.L. gave us a hard time. It took them a long time to
accept us. Their first reaction was the same as the
Bishop - "Why be seperate?" Even when we went
Christchurch for the national meeting, they looked on us
as deserters. But we perservered and gradually opinion
changed. Now they are encouraging Samoan and other
ethnic groups to set up branches of their own. They can
now see the value of such groups.

Sister Marie Chanel & Dave

We learned a lot from our Pakeha sisters, and, after
some time, they began to appreciate the Maori input
when we came together for national meetings. Aunt
Martha (Cash) was very popular with them. They said
how she flourished in a Maori setting. For several years
the Treaty of Waitangi was on the agenda, and gradually
the Pakeha members learned more about it and
accepted it. And now, they have come out in support of
the statement of the New Zealand Bishops on the Treaty.
Our group still meets at Te Unga Waka, which is
central. Usually it's the third Monday of the month. But 
we adapt to suit the members, some of whom like
Chrissie have many irons in the fire. Our numbers area
very good. But we are sad at the loss of people like
Sister Marie Chanel, Martha Cash, Sadie Hussey, Bella
Harris, Emma and Tui.

Hato Hohepa's influence always strong among our
women's groups. Re-union :- Sisters Maureen,
Josephine, Lorraine, Rose, Beverley, Marie Chanel,
Marie Andre.

page 32

Our work has a strong spiritual kaupapa which
gives us a different approach from that of the
Maori Women's Welfare League. But we are not
afraid to go public on women's issues; women
made in God's image, and on health and
education issues. However, we value very highly
the prayerful support we can give to our people in
times of sorrow. Every year, when it gets towards
Christmas time, we have our Thanksgiving Mass
at the Carmelites. We always look forward to that
haven of peace and the little party afterwards.
Looking at the future, I'd like to see more of our
young Maori women coming forward to join us.
They will gain much from sharing in this group.
When we first started, many of our ladies were
very shy and inexperienced in speaking, but after
a while they were able to stand up and express
themselves with confidence, and present their
own ideas and points of view. I would like to see it
grow and even set up other centres. In Auckland
there is so much work that could be done; and it is
very satisfying, because it is based on aroha right
through.

Tui, Urania, Te Wau (Dave), S. Fidelis, Lucy, Chris,
Norma Lovatt, Ann Trevena, Mary Blincoe, June, Kath,
Jan Mudgway, Eve, Rachel.

June checks the preserves.

Pat, Eve, June, Chris, Monica, Urania, Thelma, Marie Andre

Ka nui tenei, nei? My dear friends I hope you don't get
too hoha reading this. I was involved in many aspects of
Te Unga Waka, but when Pa Ryan asked me to write
something, I decided to talk about the two Women's
Leagues.
May Te Unga Waka continue to be a place to meet and
learn from each other and support each other.
Hei konei ra. Kei te mihi tonu te Whanau o Whaiora, o
te Wai Ariki, ki a koutou katoa. Tena koutou, tena
koutou, a, tena tatou katoa. Kia toa, kia manawanui.
Aroha nui,

* Mrs. June Mclntosh has now retired and gone to live in
Okahukura, their family home, near Taumarunui.

Nga Ringa Wera - Liza and Winnie

page 33

TE UNGA WAKA TODAY
It's very difficult to make the outside of Te Unga Waka
look attractive. Its best feature is the canoe which
Morgan Puru carved and placed over the entrance.
Thank you, Morgan also for the face-lift which you gave
to the place before the Jubilee.
The enormous heavy doors look forbidding. They also
wreck Dolly's back when she has to move them.
Perhaps one of these days a young Maori artist, imbued
with the spirit of our tupuna Maori, will come along and
design a really special entrance - a beautiful Kuwaha
which will draw you to it in welcome!

Dion touches up the Waka

Every now and then we talk of getting a real Whare
Whakairo to complete our buildings. What an asset that
would be! No longer would we have to worry about
shifting functions from the hall, especially the "Bread
Winner", Housie. But for now it remains a dream.
Recently some of our tangihanga have been held in the
recessed area of the chapel. With the benches removed
and a suitable area prepared, there has been a certain
warmth and atmosphere. Even in the main hall, with its
huge size and many entrances, a small tangi can look
and feel very lonely.
Where would we find enough money to build us a
whare whakairo? We would want the best, although not
necesaarily a big whare. The economic climate has got
everyone worried. You've got to have some weird
project before you get any grants. Perhaps it's time for
us to remember our Heavenly Father and our loved ones
who have gone ki tua o te arai. A big miracle - perhaps
the best kind of miracle - one which takes place in the
hearts of people and turns their minds and energies to
the taha Maori and the taha Wairua.
In the meantime, Te Unga Waka tries very hard to
make people feel welcome. A significant change was
made last year. The storage space between the Foyer
and the Sacristy has now been turned into an office and
waiting room. Many of our V.I.P. visitors during the
Jubilee were pleasantly surprised to find a carpeted
room with nice chairs where they could wait while things
were being prepared in the main hall.

In the past, when the offices were upstairs a callle
could walk right through the Foyer, Hall and Kitchen and
out to the back, without seeing anyone. Now, casual
visitors see the light in the office, behind the pretty,
white-laced curtains and smiling faces to welcome them

OFFICES
Across the hall there is a door which leads to four
upstairs offices. At the moment one of them is the
Communications Centre which we have named PUA
KORERO (Pua = Blossoming or coming into flower;
Korero = Communication). It may not be quite NASA
CONTROL CENTRE but it has a computer and a
photo-copier, filing cabinets and shelves of papers and
pamphlets. There you'll find Zona May organising the
archives, collating material and working on audio and
visual resources. She is related to Aupouri, Ngati Kahu,
Tuwharetoa, Ngati Hine and Ngapuhi. So there's no
doubt she is sensitive to the tribal allegiances and
differences which she meets in her work. Sometimes you
will find husband Bernard Hotere there, helping when he
can. Leonie Maxwell is co-ordinator and divides her
considerable energies between Te Unga Waka and Whai
Ora.

Meeting in the new office

Another Office is occupied by the Social Services. We
have named this group ROPU WHAKA-PIRIPIRI
WHANAU (Group drawing families closer together.) This
is a care-giving service in the areas of health and welfare
for the families. Here they receive counselling, support
and advice. Celia Pai is the contact person and overseer.

page 34

Her family is the Tatana whanau of Pawarenga,
Herekino, Te Aupouri. At present the other staff
members are Sheyne Te Hau and Liz Harris. They are
still in training, learning all about the support work for
families in strife, budgeting, court work.

The Roopu Whakapiripiri Whanau
As an adjunct to the Social Services we have the Ropu
Tautoko Rangatahi. This comes into operation during
school holidays. It organises holiday events and
programmes for the Rangatahi. The contact person here
is Miria Te Hau.
Across the courtyard is the KOHANGA REO, with its
white fence and children's play-area. There Betty
Campbell, joined recently by Sister Edith Peita, is looking
after our mokopuna. There they have all the normal
pre-school activities, but with a background of Maori
language all around them. (As one former Kaiako said,
"All my babies laugh and cry in Maori!") The Manager of
this operation is Miria Te Hau.
Next door is the MAORI ACCESS OFFICE and lecture
room, with the desks and computers and other different
helps for people who are learning new skills. The
modules help the trainees to realise their own skills.

They are taught how to apply for a job with confidence,
how to manage a key-board, how to feel good with their
own culture and spirituality. This years tutor Erana
Poulson comes from Ngati Hine and Ngapuhi. Urania
administers the operation among her other jobs. This is
the fourth year that Te Unga Waka has been operating a
Maori Access scheme, with a great deal of success.

MACCESS pupils helping Erana
Erena Craig is now taking over. Her whakapapa is
through Rangitane and Kahungunu ki Wairarapa.

MACCESS Tutor

Kohanga Reo

page 35

The GENERAL ADMINISTRATION OFFICE is now next
to the Chapel. Here all the administrative work is done
by Secretary Rehu Harris and Treasurer Urania Peita.
This is the Puta Honi with busy bees going in and out,
and where the phones are always busy.
Above the main Office is the RANGIMARIE ROOM
This was re-decorated and carpeted to make it a very
comfy venue for small size meetings. It even has its own
kitchenette.
Off the same stairs is an office which looks down on
the Chapel. Originally it was designed as a "bawl-room",
where people could take fractious children and still
watch the Service below. But it wasn't popular so we
changed it into a small Library. It still wasn't much used,
so Pa Henare has made it his office now and does a lot
of the administration side of his work from there.
Go on further up the stairs and you come to the
DORMITORY which we used for our exhibition during the
Jubilee Week. .This is in constant use, with visiting
groups using it as their base during a visit to Auckland.
We've had groups from all over New Zealand and from
just about every country round the world. With the new
showers and toilets and use of the kitchen and dining
room, it makes a very good "budget" home from home.
WHARE KARAKIA
On the right, as you enter, is our Chapel. It was
solemnly blessed exactly one year after Te Unga Waka
was opened. From that time Mass has been offered
there every day; 11 a.m. Sundays - Miha Maori, 8 a.m.
weekdays. Only when there is a funeral or wedding is the
schedule interrupted. For many of those years Yvonne
and Des Rosser have been our faithful Katekita
(Eucharistic Minister) for the morning Mass.

Yvonne and Des Rosser

During Jubilee Week, our Chapel had pride of place,
with all our activities centering around our spiritual home.
The altar is made of slabs of totara, adzed into shape.
Behind the altar is the Tabernacle. Its shaped to
represent a seed, - the seed of the Word. When its outer
doors are opened, the inner doors show the layers of a
seed and from that seed rises the cross of the Saviour.
represents his words, "Unless the seed fall in the groun
dies, itself remains alone, but if it dies it produces much
fruit." The figure of Christ on the cross is also
represented in a mystical way which some people find
strange. Recently we had a visit from a missionary who
works with Australian Aborigines, and she was
absolutely delighted with it and took several photos
show her people.

NGA KAITIAKI O TE WHARE
On the corner of Clyde and Margot Streets is the
house of the Caretaker. Dolly has had this job quite a
few years now. She came here when husband Bunny
was still driving buses. Unfortunately, he had to give up
that job when fibrositis attacked his shoulders. Dolly may
be small in size, but somehow she finds the energy to
swish away with an enormous broom, as well as looking
after her two mokopuna, Te Ahere and Te Aroha (oh, and
her husband too).

A clean sweep by Dolly


Dolly's family is the seventh to take on the job of
looking after the marae.
Seven couples have given great service over the past
twenty five years.

Mr & Mrs Toia

Mr & Mrs Adams

Mr & Mrs D Hotere

Mr & Mrs Hathaway

Mr & Mrs McMath

Mr & Mrs Wikaira

Mr & Mrs Mathews

page 36

Our first Kaitiaki: Mr & Mrs Toia

You only have to think how much time you spend try-
ing to keep your own house clean, and then compare it
with the huge size of Te Unga Waka. And it's not only
keeping it clean, but also hiring it out and being hosts to
manuhiri and looking after the kitchens and getting in the
food supplies, etc, etc.
Ka nui te mihi ki a koutou katoa. You have made our
building into a real home. Kia ora.

Mahu, Mattie, Dolly booking in the Housie Players

HOUSIE
Every Saturday afternoon it's "eyes down and looking"
at Te Unga Waka. The House starts at 1pm, but if you
want a place you will need to be there an hour or two
early. It's a very popular sport. Some people disapprove
of Housie and come up with all sorts of reasons. But as
one old lady said, "This is a great game for relaxation. If
you have got a worry on your mind, just buy an extra
card and that will keep your mind from dwelling on your
worries." Sounds good sense. As far as Te Unga Waka
goes, it pays the bills. So a big vote of thanks is due to
those people who have given many hours of their time
and worked on the Housie Committees. They are also re-
sponsible for raffles and other fund-raising activities
which not only help Te Unga Waka, but draw together all
the people who have its interests at heart.

Housie - 2 Hours before start.

Recently we inducted a new Secretary, Anna Hotere
(Matiu and Lucy Hotere's daughter). We try to keep to
Maori observances and so Anna was given a traditional
welcome, with speeches and songs. One wonders if big
business were to do this with their employees, whether it
wouldn't make them feel part of the family. Interesting
thought. At the very least, it would teach some of the stiff
Anglo-Saxon types how to make a speech without falling
over in embarrassment.

page 37

WHAT OF THE FUTURE
Why was Te Unga Waka
founded? What was the
idea which started and
sustained our elders to build
this complex? We have to
answer these questions in
order to shape our future.
As Tumuaki of the Runanga
of Te Unga Waka, I feel this
is a very big responsibility.
It's not as if there aren't
plenty of people giving us
free advice. Unfortunately
many of the loudest talkers
have their own axes to
grind.
Some of their suggestions are very dramatic, but to
me, those people are like the opening speakers on the
marae. They challenge everyone, sometimes with
tremendous exaggeration. The speakers who follow,
have the job of bringing the challengers down to earth, to
the realm of the possible.
To me, the obvious reason for the founding of Te Unga
Waka was to provide a Turangawaewae for our Catholic
Maori Whanau in Auckland. The early Maori settlers in
Auckland were very lonely sometimes, because they
were scattered. At one stage it was Government policy
(the Hunn Report) to make sure that the Maori didn't
settle in single areas. If they wanted finance to build
homes, they had to go along with the policy, called
"pepper potting". Just sprinkle the Maori around, like
pepper on your kai, and they will become pakeha.
In their country homes, they had marae and church;
sometimes it was the same thing. And these were the
things they missed most in the city. I know this all
sounds a bit too obvious, but we have to state the
obvious over and over again, to guard against people
who would like to hi-jack our centre for their own
purposes.
There's plenty of people who would like to push out
the influence of the church, for example. They come up
with the old chestnuts about the Faith being something
alien, about Missionaries being greedy land-grabbers.
My favourite Pirihi Kaumatua, Pa Aterea (Father Zangerl),
gave us his life and only took six feet of earth in return!
On the contrary, I would say that the church-whanau
was a unifying strength. In the country we have ties of
blood to unite us; each marae belongs to a family or
group of families. But in the city, with people coming
from East, West, North and South, this binding force is
absent. Our blood relationship is replaced by the unifying
blood of Christ. Iwi who would have been fighting in
earlier days, now work together and help and respect
each other. Life-styles and entertainment have totally
changed since the fifties and sixties, but I think the basic
concept of church and marae is still valid.
Every so often our kuia, Auntie Whina, descends on
us. She shakes her stick at us and demands to know if
we're doing anything and why not ?! No one dares to tell
her, because if their opinions are different from the
Dame's, they will be attacked, verbally, with great
ferocity, and all our ignorance will be revealed for
everyone to hear.
We respect the old lady. She is a necessary part of the
Maori process. She challenges everyone, her dramatic
performance no one can beat. But just as she needed
Mira, during her days as the President of the Maori
Women's Welfare League, so now she needs a person to
tautoko her ideas and bring them down to practical
details now.
I am always suspicious of sudden changes of
direction. To me Te Unga Waka is like a well made car.  
It has times when it goes a bit slow, and sometimes we
the drivers, are not very expert; but the potential is there.
I am very proud of the spiritual side of Te Unga Waka
Where else in Aotearoa has there been a Miha Maori
every Sunday for the past 25 years? And a morning
Mass every week-day. As well as daily spiritual
nourishment, there are social

services available
budgeting advice, MACCESS COURSES, Kohanga Reo
and in the evenings such varied subjects as Maoritanga
tuition, Rangimarie practices, Maori theology, meeting
of Iwi groups who look upon Te Unga Waka as their
base.
People from just about every country in the world have
stayed at Te Unga Waka; Canadians, Peruvians
Australians, Russians, Americans, Irish, Malays, Hawaiians, all the Pacific Islands; sports teams, cultural
competition teams; groups on their way to and from
Waitangi Days; Maori Orchestras; ko wai ano? Ko wai ano?
canoe teams; Australians.
The main financial support comes from the Saturday
Housie. We owe a debt of gratitude to our Housie
Committee. They produce the regular income to pay the
Rates and Power Bills etc. They give freely of their own
time. And the same few dedicated people also organise
other fund-raising events. We're proudly independent
we don't owe any nama and we don't want free
hand-outs. But we do appreciate new faces and new
families - they strengthen us - we strengthen them.
Finally a word of thanks to the many groups around
the big city who share with us from time to time. Some
of them had their origins in Te Unga Waka but have now
grown into strong centres themselves.
No reira, he mihi whanui tenei ki a koutou katoa, o
matou tuakana, teina. Tena ra koutou katoa, huri noa
Tamaki Makau Rau, Tena koutou, tena koutou katoa.
Aroha nui,

Makere Bohte

Chairperson,
Te Runanga o Te Unga Waka

page 38

He Mihi mo te Hui Whakanui
ki Te Unga Waka

na PIRIPI

Toia te waka
Tapoto te moana
Ma wai e to matatau
te Hahi Katoriki e to e!
Toia te waka
Tapoto te moana
Ma wai e to matatau
te Iwi Maori e
te Hahi Katorika e to e!
Haere mai, haere mai
Toia mai ra, kumea mai ra
Nga waka katoa kia u
ki Te Unga Waka.
E rau Rangatira, e te rohe whanui mai i te taupae o
Hunua, ki te taupae o Waitakere, ki Waitemata e ripo atu,
e ripo mai, ki Manukau moana e ripo atu, e ripo mai, ki
nga taupae huhua o te rohe ki Tamaki Makau Rau,
Tamaki herehere waka,
Tenei te mihi atu ki Te Unga Waka, Tamaki nui tonu!
Tena koutou, tena koutou, tena koutou.
Tenei te reo whakamoemiti, te reo whakawhetai ki a
koutou, me kii, ki a tatou, e noho nei ki roto i te ngahere
kohatu o Tamaki - no nga ringa awhi i tauawhitia mai ra
hoki ki Te Unga Waka mo te Huri Tau, me kii, te hui nui
whakahirahira, me kii te hui mo tona oranga mai i te
timatanga ki ta te ra nei - me pewhea te korero? Kahore
he korero! - te utu mo te manaaki, te utu mo te tauawhi
mo nga ringa i toronahia mai i toronahia atu ki te
whakapaiherenga, te pai haere o Te Unga Waka i ona ra.
Tenei te mihi atu
Tena koutou i te aroha
Tena koutou i te aroha noa
Tena koutou
Tena koutou
Tena koutou katoa.
The Silver Jubilee of Te Unga Waka, the 25th
Anniversary, began from very hunble beginnings and as
recall, with Eugene Harris and the many committees,
there wasn't even 50c in the bank account; but for the
love of and by the people, this Jubilee would never have
been.
Because it began very humbly and it concluded with a
great success, all the many people, families, loved ones,
our Priests, Religious, Supporters, our Benefactos and
Friends, please accept this personal acknoweldgement
from us all at Te Unga Waka
LEST WE FORGET

Powhiri for Pope John Paul II

Thinking up new schemes with Brother David

With Ka Corbett. The poupou is a memorial to her
husband, Ross

page 39

HE MIHI NA PA KERETI
FATHER CUSHLOW

Pa Kereti
E te whanau ma, e toku iwi tena koutou katoa. Tuatahi
o nga take he mihi ki nga mate. Tuarua o nga take he
tangi ki nga mate kua eke mai ki runga i tenei marae. He
mihi, he tangi e.
E kui ma, e koroua ma, e nga morehu o te hunga kua
katohia e te mate, tena ra koutou katoa. Kati tenei.
Mr Stephen Leacock, a famous writer, once said: It is
not hard to write. All you have to do is get some paper
and a pen and then sit down and write what OCCURS to
you. The writing is not hard, but the OCCURRING - this
my friend is the difficulty."
The day Te Unga Waka was officially opened was the
day Pa Tewano (Father O'Callaghan) and I were in the
high seas en route for England for our home leave. Pa
Tewano was very excited in sending off from the ship (at
that time in the middle of the Suez Canal) a
congratulatory cable to the priests and people of Te
Unga Waka. Now, twenty-five years later I follow Pa
Tewano in offering you another congratulatory message
on your Silver Jubilee. I offer these congratulations most
sincerely and from the heart, on behalf of the Mill Hill
Fathers and Brother Bernard.

At Rangimarie Centre Christchurch Martha,
Maria, Pa Cushlow, Ka, Rangi.

The original Bakery, rebuilt into a Maori centre,
converted from one kind of food house to another kind
of food house is, thank God, still surviving and working
most successfully for the Maori people.
All our priests, my dear people, who worked in he city
and who were attached to Te Unga Waka Centre,
worked very hard and were devoted and dedicated to
the people and work that our missionary vocation
demanded of us. I refrain from mentioning any names,
because I know that I'll unwittingly omit to mention
someone.

We know too that despite frustrations and
disappointments in the course of the work, there has
been very much happiness too. We know that because it
is God's work, it will not break down but continue to
prosper.

Toi gives a last farewell to Father Jack King.
Pa Kereti looks on, worried for the future.

At one time there was an Englishman who was driving
his Rolls Royce car through the Alps. Unfortunately, as
he was making a turn at high speed, a front spring
broke. In distress, our driver phoned the Rolls Royce
Company in England to report the trouble and the next
day, a company representative appeared and replaced
the broken spring with a new one. So the Englishman
and his Rolls purred on their merry way and without
further mishap on the holiday. No account was received
for the work or for the new spring, and this worried the
Englishman. Finally, he sent a telegram asking for the
account for "Swiss repairs of Rolls Royce broken
spring". The manager of RR replied most courteously,
"There's no such thing a s a broken spring on a Rolls
Royce."
May I conclude these congratulatory remarks with the
following story. I feel the story can be applied to the
pirihi o te taha Maori. We have never been under the
illusion that we understood the Maori people as they
understand themselves, and at times, this
non-understanding has been the cause of our frustration
and grief but it has never prevented us from loving the
people and the work. Here is my story :-
Mr Harry Winston was known as the Ace of Diamonds
and had a life-time love affair with the precious stones
and this made him the world's leading gem dealer. His
headquarters were a five storey building in the style of
Louis XIV in 5th Avenue, New York. Harry once watched
one of his salesmen show a beautiful diamond to a
wealthy
Dutch merchant. The customer listened
thoughtfully to the expert's description, but eventually
turned away, saying, "It's a wonderful stone, but not
exactly what I want." Winston stopped the customer on
his way out and asked "Do you mind if I show you that
diamond once more?" The merchant agreed and
Winston took the stone in his hand. He did not repeat
anything the salesman had said. He simply talked about
the gem as an object of deep beauty. Abruptly, the
customer changed his mind and bought the diamond.
While he was waiting for it to be brought to him, he
turned to Winston and said, "Why did I buy it willingly
from you, though I had no difficulty in saying no to the
salesman?" Winston answered, "The salesman is one of
the best in the business. He knows diamonds, but I love
them".
God bless you all and the priests and nuns who work
with you.
Ma te Atua koutou e tino manaaki e tino tiaki.
Aroha nui na Pa Kereti

page 40

WAITARUKE
Ko Ngati Kahu tenei mihi atu nei ki a koutou, te iwi o
Te Unga Waka. Tena koutou i tenei tau tiuperi - 25 o nga
tau. E mihi tonu ana ahau ki a koutou mo te manaaki ki
nga Manuhiri i te wiki o te Tiuperi; te pai hoki o nga Hui
Karakia, o nga Konohete, o nga kai hakari. Many
congratulations to all who made it possible.
Te Unga Waka didn't exist when I did a spell in
Auckland. I was given this huge area to look after, mainly
to the East and South of the city. If I'd counted the
number of cups of tea I drank in the course of a day, it
would be in the Guiness Book of Records. The idea was
to set up Committees in each significant area where our
Maori people could come together for a Miha Maori.
Each group would have executives and a Katekita for the
many occasions when the pirihi couldn't be there.
I can't forget the faithful Legion of Mary, 3 groups in
Glen Innes, Senior, Intermediate and Junior; Panmure
with its junior group; Papatoetoe and Otahuhu with a
senior group each. The Legion did a lot of work with our
Maori people, and it did a lot of good for me too.

Fr. Laidler (with cross) also says good-bye to
Fr Jack King

It's funny how you only remember the good times, and
the good people one got to know in the travels about the
city. Dave King and Margaret were so very kind to me.
What a laugh, one day, when we persuaded Dave to
come and watch a cricket match at Eden Park. New
Zealand was playing West Indies. He only came to
please us; I think he's still waiting for the kick-off! I hear
that Dave's health is not good. You must all pray very
hard to keep his because his guidance in things Maori is
so valuable.
Another great friend and hard-case has gone to
heaven; Charlie Shelford. At the time, Charlie and Blue
were preparing to have their marriage blessed in the
church and I had to take Charlie through the Catechism.
Poor Charlie, after a day's hard work, theology was the
last thing he wanted to discuss! But he was a great
person when it came to the practical side of being a
Christian. He and Turo Tepania were so faithful in visiting
the sick in hospital. When Fr Cushlow's Mum was
nearing the end, they used to pray with her every night,
and the Sisters would broadcast their night prayers all
over the ward. When she died they took her back to
Waiaruke. Katahi a Charile ka tu ake ki te whai-korero -
the vey first time in his life. "This is the first time I've ever
stood up, even among my own people, but I want you to
know that I'm not scared of Ngati Kahu or their pirihi or
his Mum!"
If I told all the stories about Charlie, there wouldn't be
room left in your book.
So I'll finish off by thanking you again for the very
happy Jubilee. For the years that lie ahead, kia mau ki
to koutou Whakapono me to koutou Maoritanga.
God bless you all,

Pa Hohepa - Fr Joe Laidler
Parish Priest, Waitaruke

page 41

Father Aarts sends his
Best Wishes
Kei te mihi atu ahau ki a koutou, oku hoa aroha, i te
huringa tau Tekau ma Rima o Te Unga Waka.
As I sit here, far away from you all, my thoughts go
back to all the people who worked so hard to get Te
Unga Waka built. First of all, the leaders at that time, Pa
Matiu, the spiritual leader and Whina Cooper, the
President of the Auckland Catholic Maori Society, who
worked hard for the Centre, especially organising the
money-raising efforts.
Some of them who worked so hard have gone with Pa
Matiu, kua ngaro atu i te tirohanga tangata. No reira,
haere e nga mate, haere ki te kainga tuturu. Here, haere,
haere
I pray that the Centre will continue to grow as the
heart of the Maori life and Maori spirituality and will
continue to be an instrument for the evangelizing of
Maori culture.
Kia nui nga manaakitanga a to tatou Ariki ki a koutou i
nga tau kei te heke mai.

aroha nui,
Pa Kereti - Fr. 9. Carto

Fr Aarts gets his cake

Pa Kereti (Father Aarts) says his last Miha Maori at Hato
Petera. He served the Maori people for 54 years.

Two old friends, Lawrence Petricevich makes a
presentation to Fr Aarts on his Golden Jubilee

Ka O'Brien, Br Nevil, Mike O'Brien & moko, Toby Curtis,
Joe Rika, Fr Aarts, Laurence Petricevich, Piripi Munro,
Br Canisius, Vic Mokaraka.
Fr Aarts retired in 1986 to go and live near his sister in
their home town of Gilse in the Netherlands. He is getting
a bit frail now and has gone to live in a retirement home
for Mill Hill Missionaries. He is enjoying life there, but
finds it hard to write or even type. He enjoys getting
news from Aotearoa, especially about the people he
knows and the places he lived in, Ngati Tuwharetoa,
Whanau a Apanui, Whanau o Hato Petera. His address is
FR G AARTS, HUIZE VRIJLAND, POSTBUS 20, 6860 AA
OOSTERBEEK, THE NETHERLANDS.

page 42

PA WIREMU TUERLINGS

When you asked for a little contribution to the Silver
Jubilee Magazine I sat down and thought back and what
struck me was - that all the people who came to mind
are all dead and buried. Haere e nga mate. Haere, haere,
haere.
A little scene came to mind - Pa Matiu, Pa Petera and
myself, gazing up at the ceiling in the main hall where
some of the tiles had come loose. The painters had
erected a big scaffolding on wheels but they had gone
off work for the night.
"Why didn't they put the ceiling panels right, while
they were up there?" asked Pa Matiu. "Hold that thing
steady," said Pa Petera and he began to climb up. But
the thing was shaky. He got about half way up, then
came down very fast. So Pa Matiu had a go, and you've
got to give it to the old man. He got right to the top and
fixed the panels. Pa Petera and I were at the bottom
pushing. Eventually we rolled him towards the stage
where there are two hot air outlets, high up. We put him
in front of one of them and turned on the central heating!
Both of them are gone now. Haere korua ki te
maramatanga mutunga kore.
I thought of Pauline and her pakeha husband Jack
Russel. When Pauline and Jack looked after the
customary evening meal in Te Unga Waka, Jack always
had special steaks ma nga pirihi! Beautiful steaks!

Jack Russell prepares the kai.
Charlie Shelford watches.
I thought of Maisy and Charlie Shelford (both gone
now too). They were in charge of Te Unga Waka Bowling
Club. They kept a faithful record of the finances of the
Bowling Club even though they never amounted to more
than a few dollars. Every single cent was duly recorded
and managed. They gave their financial records to Pa
Petera for auditing. On one side was written INCOME
and on the other side OUTCOME. God bless their faithful
souls.

I think of the Legion of Mary of which I was the
spiritual director. We met every Monday in the sacristy of
St Patrick's Cathedral: Wiki Hotere, Martha Rapira,
Bubbles, Weka, Pat Peita, Dave King, Liza Tipene. One
day Father Keating (also dead now) who was a curate at
St Patrick's at the time called in after the meeting was
over. He said, "Let us have a cup of tea." and started
getting out the saucers and cups and doing all the work.
Liza Tipene (now also gone) said to Father Keating,
"Father, you don't need celibacy! You are doing quite
well on your own."
I think of the gracious smile on the face of Mrs Manu,
as I always called her, because I could never think of
Julie's name. When I said "Tena koe Mrs Manu" you
could see that beautiful smile coming on. Even she has
passed away. I am singing the Litany of All the Saints by
the sound of it. They were all Saints, no other word could
describe them.
And of course I think of all the good people in the
Avondale, Te Atatu and Henderson areas where I
roamed around a lot; Pat Lundon, Tatana (Totoni) Terei,
Nan Lundon, Miria Hotere, Dan Rapira, Anne Kidd, Mere
Daniels and Ken Moka. All of them kua mate. Kua wehe
atu koutou. Haere ki te kainga pumau Haere, haere,
haere.
I think of the good nuns of St Anne's in Shelly Beach
Road, where I said Mass every day. Sister Herve (also
kua mate) used to come in the small parlour where I had
my breakfast and yap with me in her native French
language. May she rest in peace. I think of Sister
Coleman and all the other good Sisters of St Anne's and
what they did for the Maori Mission in Auckland. May
Gold bless them all!

Sisters at St Anne's - meeting the family.
Sister Coleman in front.

What was the highlight of my stay in Auckland? It is
hard to say. But one of the highlights was in 1988. I was
in Tokoroa at the time when I received a letter from
Donna Rapira. She had read in Zealandia that I had been
given a knighthood by the Dutch Queen Donna wrote:
"Only now, through Zealandia, I know how to spell your
name."

page 43

And Donna wrote to thank me for the wonderful time
she had in Knock-na-gree Camp for the Auckland
children. She was a kid then, and 20 years later she felt
she had to write a letter of thanks. If ever I appreciated a
letter, it was hers. So we must have done some good,
somewhere. I never realised I would be so susceptible
and thrilled with a word of thanks.

Liza (Whizzie) taking a break.

A final story comes to mind. There was a tangi at Te
Unga Waka and Liza Tipene was having a good laugh
with Louise (wife of Joe Nuku who was a fruiterer in
Point Chevalier). Liza thought she should explain what
the joke was. "Father, when Louise and Joe had been
married for a while, they had no children. So she asked
me - "Liza, you are a church woman. Can you
recommend a Saint who will help me to have children?"
So I recommended her to pray to St Gerard Majella. And
sure enough, it worked. It worked too well. Now, with all
her kids she was asking me, "Liza, can you recommend
any saint who could help me to stop?" Liza said, "Ae, me
inoi ki a Hohepa!" That's why they were both laughing.
No reira, koutou katoa, I would like to thank all people
affiliated to Te Unga Waka for their kindness shown to
me and also to all the Mill Hill Fathers during our work in
Auckland.

Aroha nui, na

PA WIREMU TUERLINGS

Pa Wiremu tells a tall story to Pa Kereti

FATHER TONY BROWN
Tena koutou katoa, te whanau o Te Unga Waka.
My fondest memories of sharing in the work of Te
Unga Waka was the opportunity given to me to live at
321 Manukau Road for six months, just after leaving the
seminary in 1983-84.
The help and assistance of the Mill Hill Fathers, the
Sisters and laity and the Tamaki Mission Team was
instrumental in responding more wholeheartedly to a
vocation in the priesthood.
Early Whai Ora days in Otara connected me to Te
Unga Waka. Boarding School days at Hato Petera kept
within me a close affiliation with Te Unga Waka - also
Hostel days at Gillies Ave.
So Te Unga Waka has on more ways than one, been
in and a part of my personal history and development.
The early days of the Runanga at Te Unga Waka were
at times awkward and turbulent, but one saving grace in
it all was knowing all the people involved, loving them
then, and loving them all still today in whatever situation
life has taken them.
So, HAPPY ANNIVERSARY to Te Unga Waka -
HE KOHANGA WHARE E KITEA
HE KOKONGA HINENGARO EKORE E KITEA

Tony earns his cake
Freda, Dave & Pa Henare

page 45

THE RACE IS STILL ON

Avondale racecourse has had to change its image
over the years. It was not due to the horses but to the
people. The same situation occurred between Te Unga
Waka and Te Hauauru. There were, and still are, many
good horses in either stable. They both knew their track
and were qualified in running the course and drawing the
scattered Maori of the Auckland district to their regular
meetings.
The main stable, Te Unga Waka Centre, was accepted
by most and given support.
Western suburbs (Te Hauauru) set up their own TAB
(Housie) at Avondale and Te Atatu, using the Parish
Halls. The dividends were shared out between the
Parishes, Te Unga Waka and their own Committees. At
that time there were already plans for a Catholic Marae
at Te Hauauru. Under the guidance of the two Chief
Whips (Stipes?) Eric Kidd and Sonny Johnson, they
surely brought in the oats and worked very hard with
their trainers and jockeys.
During my stay in Auckland (1972 - 1982), I looked
after the Western suburbs for at least five years, and
though there were some stray kicks for some, the overall
running was excellent.

In my room is a picture of four horses, three mares
and a black stallion, a true reminder of the Te Atatu
Catholic Maori Committee - Sonny and Molly Johnson,
Margaret Winks and Maggie, the only white horse on the
team. What a great team they were and they never
seemed to get hoha.
May Gold bless them all and may Sonny prepare a
good track for all of us on the heavenly racecourses.
At present the dream of Eric and his team has become
a reality. They now have Te Whau. What was formerly
the hall, and before that the church of St Mary's
Avondale, is now their meeting-house.

Fr Mertens and old friends meet at the Jubilee:
Pat, Pa Wiremu & Monica.
Their funds, their energy and their artistry have made it
a very special building. Best of all it has been honoured
as a whare tangihanga, during the mourning for Dan
Rapira. We are sure the Maori people of Te Hauauru will
appreciate the work done by so many over the last 25
years.
Some have died since and others have retired to
grazing in the superannuation paddock (where the grass
is a bit thin these days)!
May the yearlings have the stamina of their parents
and continue to do their trackwork. Each one will have a
handicap, but that is the way of life. As long as we see
them at the starting line! The Tupuna and the Auckland
Maori Mission have put their bets on. Make sure the
dividends are worth collecting in years to come!
Ma te Atua koutou katoa e manaaki, e tiaki hoki.

Rev G Mertens
Pawarenga

Sonny and Molly's Anniversary

page 45

MEMORIES OF TE UNGA WAKA
Te mea tuatahi maku, he wahi mihi ki a koutou katoa i
tenei Tau Tiuperi o to tatou marae. Tena ra koutou katoa,
nga hoa pumau, oku kuia, koroua, tuakana, teina tae noa
ki nga wahi mokopuna, tena koutou, tena koutou, tena
koutou.
Ko etahi kua ngaro atu i te kanohi, kaore e taea te
powhiri-a-ingoa, otira me ki kua tae atu kotou ki te
kainga tuturu, te marae o to tatou Ariki. Haere, haere,
haere.
Tena tatou te hunga ora e noho nei i tenei ao
pahekeheke. Kua kaumatua haere tatou, kua ngaro nga
huruhuru, kua piko nga tuara, otira, te mea nui e kaha
ana tatou ki te katakata i a tatou e mahara nei ki nga wa
o mua.
During the years I spent at Te Unga Waka, it was often
a hive of activity. Badminton was very popular, so was
bowls. A lot of young people made sure the trampoline
was in constant use. But there are some things that
stand out clearer in the mind than others. I'll mention a
few of these.

Rerehau waiting to greet Pa Ateriano

OUR T.V. MIHA MAORI
In October 1974 we were given the opportunity of
presenting our Miha Maori on Television. After
discussing it we decided to present it as a truly Maori
event. Tikanga Maori of course lends itself to several
elements of the Mass.

The welcome, the acknowledgement of each other and of our Kaihanga,
the prayers of cleansing the soul when we confess our
sinfulness, the seeking of wisdom from our spiritual
tupuna, and many more.
For the first part of the Miha, we moved the altar and
the chapel became a marae. The choir and the priests
were the tangata whenua. The people were called in by a
karanga, called and,answered three times. Tauparapara
"Ko te Whakaariki, ko te Whakaariki ... ", "Toia mai te
waka ... ". Then the first mihi aroha, with replies from the
people, interwoven with our waiata, Tama Ngakau and E
te Ariki tohungia ra matou.

By the time we got to the Offertory, the complete
welcome had been carried out - ara, kua whakatau te
iwi. The hosts and the guests had united as one family.
The altar was then brought forward and the bread and
wine placed on it. Then Dame Whina came forward and
placed on the altar her C.B.E. which had just been
added to her M.B.E. It was an act of thanksgiving and a
plea for future guidance.
Afterwards, it was surprising how many Pakeha
Catholics had watched and been moved by the aptness
of so much of our karakia. For example the waiata
powhiri after the Consecration expressed the basis of
our Faith - that the Lord was really among us; and the
No te Hohonutanga expressed our unity with those of us
who had gone ki tua o te arai.

FESTIVAL OF FAITH
The Festival of Faith was another high point among
our Whanau of Te Unga Waka. It took quite a lot of
organising. Sunday after Sunday we had Bring and Buy
and Raffles. Each group had our own Princess or Prince
to support. The rivalry added the spice of competition
and made the raising of money that much more
enjoyable.
An exhibition of Religious Art was arranged, new
hymns were composed and learned and Rangimarie
"took a deep breath" and launched into the production
of Christ the Maori.
The weekend Festival was held at Hato Petera. The
kitchens at Te Unga Waka worked all day long and
truckloads of food were carted over the shore to feed the
multitude.

TENTH JUBILEE
The Tenth Anniversary of the opening also stands out
in my memory. All the different branches of our Whanau
and friends each took a different part of the marae to
give it a "face-lift". The whole place from floor to ceiling
was sanded, varnished, painted and draped in new
curtains.
For the entertainment we went international. Each
night of the week a different ethnic group came along
with their own dances and music. It was very enjoyable
seeing the immense variety of culture which is all around
us in New Zealand.

MARKET DAYS
The Market days (usually Sundays) in Te Unga Waka
hall helped to raise money for various projects. Victoria
Market has nothing on what happened at Te Unga Waka
- stalls everywhere, sales, raffles, weeks on end. One of
the efforts that brought out the best in everyone was the
family rivalry of the Princess and Prince Carnival. Our
Kuia and Koroua had a great time helping their
mokopunas. A huge number of entries made it one of the
most close-fought carnivals and financially very successful.

page 46

TRIPS WITH RANGIMARIE
The trips with Rangimarie to present Christ the Maori
were very tiring. But in spite of some arguments and
grumbles that arose because of being so tired, we
always managed to get them sorted out in time for the
next trip; even though sometimes it took a ten-hour
meeting to do so.
Two of these trips had a special significance for me.
a) The weekend in Mosgiel at the Seminary. The
performance of Christ the Maori and the Miha Maori
were magnificent. They made an immense impression on
students, staff and the people of Mosgiel.
b) Our trip to Taumarunui. Before I came to Te Unga
Waka I was stationed in Taumarunui for three years.
Whilst I was there a beautiful new church was built. One
of its features was a large Cross with Maori carvings
standing over 20 feet high. The carvings were done by
Archie Taiaroa (Hato Paora Old Boy) and his uncle
George Anderson and myself. So, when the community
there built a new Meeting House, I was asked to carve
two poupou for it. By this time I was at Te Unga Waka.
Two big slabs of totara arrived and were put in the
garage at 321 Manukau Road.
So I started to carve and found I had a little helper.
Our Housekeeper's daughter, Waimarie, was only a
toddler at the time. She decided I needed her help and
wanted to carve too. She became the best watchdog
you would wish for. Nobody else was allowed to get near
the carvings. Even if her mother Becky put her head
round the corner, she would say, "Out! Out! Me and
Fafa!" And if I didn't carve often enough for her liking,
she would say, "Fafa, come, the Tongue". Her little mind
had identified the challenging arero as something
special; that became her name for them.
When we went to Taumarunui to perform Christ the
Maori and have a Miha Maori, we took the carvings.
They were all wrapped up because they were not to be
exposed until the opening of the Meeting House. We
learned that we should not carry them onto the marae in
a horizontal position, because that is the position in
which a dead person is carried. They had to be carried
feet first, but with the head considerably higher than the
feet.

With Hana and Martha at Rangimarie Centre

In the speeches of the handing-over ceremony I
mentioned that they were my children, born and grown
under the shadow of Te Unga Waka, but that they
should stay in the new Meeting House as their adopted
children, and hence the bond between Te
Taura-Whiri-a-Hinengakau and Te Unga Waka could not
be broken.
Waimarie did not agree. On the way back she insisted,
"Fafa! The Tongue! The Tongue!" She didn't like to leave
them there. But if you go to the Meeting House in
Taumarunui and see the two carvings with a cross in the
hand, instead of the mere you know you are among
friends. They are the children of Te Unga Waka - he
whanaunga no tatou.
These are a few of many happy memories of my time
at Te Unga Waka. It was very pleasant to come to the
Jubilee and be among so many old friends again. Te
Unga Waka gave me a very lovely time on the occasion
of my Silver Jubilee as a priest and I want to thank you
all for that. But the years don't stand still, and this year I
have reached the milestone of forty years - the Ruby
Anniversary. This time I am taking time off to celebrate it
in the place where I was born, in the town of Tilburg in
the south of the Netherlands. The Wahakapono has
always been strong there. It has given many priests to
the Mill Hill Fathers, and so I am proud of it and wish to
share this occasion with those members of my family
who are still alive. Ki ta te poroporoaki, "Mate kainga
tahi, ora kainga rua" - but these days with jet travel and
telephones and faxes and live T.V. the world has grown
smaller and it's good to keep in touch with both sides.
Tena ana koutou katoa, oku tini whanaunga i roto i te
Whanau o te Hihi, o Te Unga Waka hoki. He nui nga mihi
- Tena koutou, tena koutou, tena koutou katoa.

Pa Ateriano with Sr Chanel, Bp Mackey, Pa Kereti,
Dave King and Ka Corbett at Mosgiel.

page 47

CHRIST THE MAORI
By Manu Adams
Haere mai nui mai, e te Ariki
Ko koe te Aranga me te Ora
Mauria mai nga taonga wairua
Nga hua tapu o te Aranga
Kia hari kia koa tatou katou
Na te mea kua ara a Hehu
Kua ara tatou i roto i te Ariki
Kua whiti ki te maramatanga
Areruia, areruia, areruia

The Haka

Tenei te mihi atu nei ki a koutou te Komiti Whakahaere
o te Tiuperi, ki nga kaimahi hoki me nga ringa wera, araa,
koutou katoa, Kuia, Kaumatua, Taitamariki Tamariki tae
noa ki te Whakatuputanga Hou. Tena koutou katoa. He
nui nga mihi ki a koutou mo te pai o te Wiki Tiuperi o Te
Unga Waka.

I would like to extend my congratulations to all
concerned in the Silver Jubilee Celebrations of Te Unga
Waka. Personally I was very sad that I was called away
on Social Welfare business and was able to enjoy only a
couple of days of the Jubilee.
Memories come flooding back to my mind as I think of
the years when I was Chairperson of Te Rangimarie
Cultural Group. For more than five years we took the
play, Christ the Maori to so many halls and Marae all
over the country.
In 1973 Te Rangimarie began practising for the
Festival of Faith, to be held that October in Hato Petera.
As many of the items touched on the life of Christ, Pa
Henare suggested that we weld them together and
create new ones. So we began to use waiata, petere, poi
and haka to illustrate Christ's life, death and resurrection.

KARAITI TE MAORI made a strong impression at the
Festival. There was something different, something
charismatic about it. We thought it would only be a
"one-off" performance, but immediately requests started
coming in for repeat performances, Parish priests
wanted it performed in their parishes, leaders from other
areas wanted it presented on their marae. From then on
we were kept busy, complying with the invitations which
came from everywhere.

During that tine I had the chance to observe the
concepts of Whanau and Whanaungatanga at work in
our group. There were pressures and stresses and
grievances, but they were outweighed by the whanaunga
unity. We were dedicated and committed to portray a
drama that was steeped in Taha Wairua and Taha Maori.

Hehu speaks to his people
The group usually consisted of fifty or sixty as well as
the little ones. An invitation would be received either
personally or it writing. The Chairman, the Spiritual
Director and selected members of the group would make
the decision to accept or decline. The group members
were ordinary working people so we had to watch the
expenses, especially the means of travel. But in those
five years, I cannot think of an invitation being declined.

The Nativity

page 48

Rangimarie Rangimarie go to Mosgiel

Our two longest trips were to Christchurch and
Dunedin. We completely filled a commercial flight going
down to the 75th Jubilee of the Seminary at Mosgiel. It
was the day when the clocks went forward one hour -
and Bob and Gemma and their family had the thrill of
seeing the plane take off, while they were still on the
Mangere Bridge! They caught the next flight down and
nearly beat us on to the marae as Arai - Te-Uru
welcomed us. Then we joined the locals in welcoming
their Manuhiri Tuarangi, the Australian Cardinal Wright.
He was lavish in his praise of Christ the Maori.
The next day, Sunday was a full day. Our Miha Maori
was very emotional. Then we farewelled 1. The Cardinal,
2. The Papal Delegate, 3. The Bishop of Tonga. Then we
farewelled ourselves and got on the buses back to the
airport. For the flight back to Christchurch we had two
planes. The luckier people got in the smaller Cook's
flight. Because it flew lower you got a great view of the
countryside.
That evening we performed at the James Hay Theatre
and the mainly Pakeha audience was very enthusiastic.
The Newspapers the next day had very kind reports.

Chris, Maisie, Kahu, Wargie, Carmel, Mattie, May
Shirley, Hana, Kate, Bonita, (2nd row) Bernadette, Julie,
Maryanna, Saana, Shirley Te Tai, (back) Pio, Eddie,
Manu, Pio Jnr, Taria, Paul, John Kite holding Benjie

Archbishop Acerbi, Kuini Waitai, Cardinal Wright, Pa Henare, Ka Corbett

page 49

But mostly our Ope travelled by the good old
Clevedon Clipper bus or by using the Auckland Regional
or Whenuapai Buses. They became our regular, once a
month, means of transport. We had to limit it to once a
month for trips out of Auckland. Kaitaia, Dargaville,
Taumarunui, Gisborne, Te Kaha, Tauranga, Mangakino
and many more names became familiar to us.
First of all we would work out the distance and the
probable time it would take. Then we would look at the
performance time and work back from that, to make sure
we started early enough. If the venue was north of
Whangarei or south of Hamilton, it meant a late Friday
night departure. Usually we set out about midnight to
arrive in the early hours of Saturday. That would give us
time
to rest before the afternoon or evening
performance.

Dolly, Winnie, Mere Daniels, Lena
me nga tamariki

Every presentation had to be considered on its own.
There were always different elements. Was everyone
available? Would we stay on a marae or board out or
even (on odd occasions) sleep in the bus? What were
the travel costs? What type of people would be our
audience?
At Te Kaha, for example, we performed for the
Whanau-a-Apanui on the verandah, the Mahau of the
beautiful carved meeting house, Tukaki. We felt the
peaceful presence of Tukaki and his father Apanui after
whom the people are named.
In Taupo we had trouble with the stage, but we
worked on it, and the performance was excellent.
During these visits our whanau always grew bigger.
within a very short time our new acquaintances had
become part of the wider whanau - friends who would
keep in touch for years. And of course everywhere we
would meet "long-lost" relations, our own kith and kin.

A marae visit
On the Sunday mornings, an early breakfast would be
allowed by Miha Maori then a hakari - and then the
farewells - Nga Mihi Poroporoaki! A song or two from
our hosts and a song or three from us - and we soon
forgot the planned time of departure.
Te Ropu Rangimarie gained experience and
knowledge from every trip. Right from the beginning we
decided that this was not just another play or concert, it
was a religious experience. We were privileged to
portray Christ and his Whanau. We took them with us on
every expedition. It was a Spiritual Retreat. That was
why we put ourselves under strict rules of no strong
drink and exemplary behaviour.

Manu surveys the marae at Otiria

Performance on the mahau of Tumatauenga, Otiria

page 50

Dick and Maria Parker

As I write this, I hear the voices coming from the past -
Mere Daniels, Martha Cash, my own darling Julie, little
baby Jesus (Heremaia Nicholls), Cecilia Wharewaka, Noa
Waiti, Tom Waru who left us just recently, and so many
of our loved ones. We say to them: Haere ra kotou
katoa. Haere ki te Ropu Waiata o nga Ahere. A te wa e
whakaritea ai e to tatou Ariki, ka kite ano tatou i a tatou,
ka waiata ano tatou i a tatou. Kia kite-a-kanohi koutou i
te Karaiti, kia kaha te waiata ki a ia.
Me tatou hoki nga kanohi ora. Tena ano koutou nga
morehu o te hunga kua moe. Kia kaha tatou ki te whai
atu i o ratou tapuwae. Tena koutou, tena koutou, a, tena
kotou katoa.

(And a couple of reminiscences from Dolly)
When we took CHRIST THE MAORI to Paremoremo
we were a bit nervous. The audience sat up stiffly, with
arms folded. Most of them looked bored. The people
who knew Pa Henare and who had invited us to come,
were looking a bit worried. I suppose they were hoping
that the prisoners would behave themselves and give us
a respectful hearing. There was security everywhere,
which made us more nervous than ever. But we need not
have been. Those hard men were really touched by the
play. Afterwards, we were pretty sure they went without
their evening kai, so that the manuhiri could be treated
properly and have a meal to end the visit.
On one occasion (it could have been at Tauranga),
there was an old kuia in the front row. She had been ill
for a long time and the doctors said she only had a
month or two to live. She told the people around her that
she had been to all the doctors and healers and
tohungas, but without any luck, so now she was coming to
Christ himself. She was so moved by the performance
that she really joined in the tangi for Christ's death. That
tangi always got to us too, no matter how many times
we performed the play. We might say: "I'm sure I won't
cry tonight," but we always ended up crying real tears.
At the end of the play, she came up and asked Pio if
they could just touch him and say a prayer. Christ must
have helped them because they came to several other
performances over the years, when their finances
allowed. They always sat in the front row.


Gabe, Paul, Pat, Joe, Pio, Manu, Tom, Eddie, Charlie
Fr Geboers, Junior, Bunny, Carmel, Tina, Maria, Martha, Hana, Saana, Mattie, Mani, Margaret,
Chris, Wargie, Cam, Shirley, Julie, Becky, Kate, Bonita,
Paddy, Sarah, Ka, Rahere, Tot, Sr Chanel, Maisie, Dolly, May, Avelyn, Rhoda, Michael, Eddie,
Tania, Karen, Terry, Veronica, Stephen, Nadia, Benjie, Toby, Jimmy and Philip.

page 51

Julie made a list of all the performances of
CHRIST THE MAORI, HE HU TE KARAITI

1973 Festival of Faith: Two performances 20 & 21st Oct
Te Unga Waka - 28 Oct, 4 & 18 Nov
Hamilton 25 Nov
Paremoremo 7 Dec
Manurewa 8 Dec
New Lynn 14 Dec

1974 Te Atatu 24 March
Manurewa 29 March

Te Unga Waka 31 March
Gisborne: Two performances 6 April
Otara 28 April
Mangere
Edgecombe
Te Kaha October
Taupo
Mangakino 8 Dec

1975 Te Unga Waka 9 Feb
Waiheke
Hato Petera 22 March
New Plynouth Hui Aranga 28 March
Tauranga 19 April
Mosgiel 3 May
Christchurch 4 May
Panguru 16 August
Kaitaia 27 Dept
Dargaville 11 Oct
Taumaranui 1 Nov

1976 Te Unga Waka 10th Anniv, 4 March
Murupara 3 April
Whangarei 1 May
Whakatane 12 June
Hawera 5 Sept
Rotorua 9 Oct
Otiria 21 Nov
Taupo 4 Dec

1977 Holy Sepulchre Hui Topu 22 April
Howick All Saints 7 Aug
Kohimaramara St Andrews 5 Oct
Opononi 22 Oct
Pawarenga 23 Oct
Tokoroa 12 Nov

1978 Te Unga Waka 5 June
Mangere 17 June
Pukekohe 26 Aug
Panguru Festival of Faith Labour Weekend
Papakura 25 Nov
Invercargill 1 & 2 Dec

1991 Te Unga Waka Silver Jubilee 10 March

Diane, Chris, Dick Hotere, Maria Parker

"E whakanui ana toku wairua ki te Ariki"

Silver Jubilee Crowd watch Christ the Maori

page 52

Captain Cook looks on
Lena, Diane, Dolly and Chris

A quick photo at a bus stop.
May Waru, Hana Kite, Ani Jacobs, Louisa Wharewaka
Louisa Waru

Manu in the pot

Dave leads in the heavyweights

One of the earliest performances
Freda, May, Carmel, Becky, Georgina, Diane, Hana, Chris, Dick, Dave, Maria, Lena, Pio Jnr, Charlie, Shirley, Dolly.

page 54

Lady Rose lights the Jubilee Candle

Bishop Takuira me tana ope

Pirihi o te Taha Maori
G. Mertens, B. Dennehy, A. Geboers,

Pa Henare welcomes Bishop Denis

D. Horrigan, G. Cushlow, J. Laidler

Ameria, June, Eva and John

Kei te waiata a Piripi, Pihopa Takuira.

Kei te tangi marika te iwi
mo Hehu kua mate nei

page 55

Waiata tangi

Sorrow at Christ's sufferings

Wehe atu ra e Hehu e te Ariki.

Haere mai! Nau mai! E te Ariki

Kia tau te rangimarie

Hapa whakamutunga

Jeanette, Nadia, Tania, Bernadette, Katarina,
Hazel, Tania, Hana, Erana, Kataraina, Dolly
Audience joins actors in expressing their joy
at Christ's Resurrection

The baby Jesus is welcomed

page 57

JUBILEE WEEK
"We'll be 25 years old in March!" "Yes, we'll have to do
something about it It only comes once." "Do you think
many will come?" "How much will it cost?"
The Runanga was very conscious of the importance of
the Silver Jubilee and appointed a committee with
Eugene as Chairman, Miria Te Hau as Treasurer, Ada
Harris as Secretary and Dick Harris as Vice Chairman.
They would be responsible for raising funds, while
Margaret Bohte, Urania Peita and Rehu Harris were the
steering committee.
Eugene and his wife Liz spent many hours contacting
groups around the city and arranging socials and raffles
and anything that would make money. Te Rangimarie
took on a new lease of life with Bernard Hotere as
Chairman. His committee went to all former members to
get their support and blessing. Our speakers, Dave King
and Pat (Taria) Peita, Dick Harris and Paul Kanara were
available, while Jack Peri and Manu Adams would be
there for part of the time.

Practises every night

The response was slow at first. It was almost decided
that two days Jubilee would be all that we could
manage. Then along came Pa Henare to rouse the
drooping spirits. NINE DAYS would be just right! It would
give people and manuhiri time to come along, meet and
enjoy the occasion. It would also give us time to look at
different aspects of our Taha Maori and Taha Wairua.

Tracey helps Puti decorate the Chapel

Caroline McLean
Guide to the Motuti Mission Museum

Motuti brought along part of their Mission Museum -
beautiful gold and silver chalices, monstrances and other
sacred vessels and memorabilia used in earlier days.
The Sisters of St Joseph kindly agreed to loan their
permanent exhibition, showing the work of their Order
and the changes in dress over the years.
These were all housed in the dormitory.

Mill Hill History

In the Rangimarie Room these was a display of photos
covering twenty-five years of Te Unga Waka and posters
showing the history of the Mill Hill Fathers and their work
in New Zealand. Some of us couldn't recognise
ourselves in the skinny-looking characters of those days.

Freda, Charlie, Polly and Marlene

Our good friends Polly and Charlie Hovell and their
daughter-in-law, Yvonne, came along to be Wardens for
the week. They did a tremendous job, working really
hard, guiding and helping people and keeping in check
any high spirits. Freda Witana also brought her uniform
and joined the force.

page 58

Piripi's eagle-eye
Piripi Munro came along to check on progress. His
eagle eye didn't miss a thing. The smoke stains on the
ceiling would have to come off! And here is a koha to
help!
The women took over then and it was all Go Waka Go!
Three nights before D Day; no sleep; decorate the Hall;
Twist paper; make flower boxes; whakapati pot plants.
Stop! Re-think! Mop floors! Redecorate the stage. Mop
floors again! Put up curtains. Hope it doesn't rain - there
are leaks at the back of the Hall.
Different groups agreed to host a day each, feeding
and entertaining.

Te Haka o Hato Petera

Dolly & Mokos

Saturday belonged to Hato Petera. The PTFA and the
Old Boys were Hosts for the day. But first of all they had
to run their Annual Gala Day at the College. The sunshine
and the crowds were just what the doctor ordered. The
boys and their elders worked hard all day - not just
buying and selling but also entertaining. Somehow in the
evening they still had energy left for the Gala Social
which was taken to Te Unga Waka. The younger
students had their Blue Light Disco at the College.

Urania, Pa Henare, Charlotte Nasey & Jim Samson

Sunday began with a welcome to the travellers who
had come overnight. Then the usual Sunday Miha Maori
at 11 o'clock was taken over by the girls of Hato
Hohepa. They prepared everything and led the singing
assisted by St John's College, Hastings. The Hato
Hohepa Old Girls and PTFA were the hosts for the day.
They cooked all the meals and entertained us while we
ate. After tea, we crowded into the chapel for
Benediction.

Girls of Hato Hohepa
Eugene and Dick Harris were the "altar boys"
assisting the priests. Piripi made sure that we all
appreciated the occasion. The singing was beautiful - O
Salutaris, Tantum Ergo, Adoremus - we hadn't forgotten
the tunes! We all remembered Sunday afternoons in
country churches like Motukaraka, Waitaruke, Waihou,
Rotokakahi, the sound of the chiming bells and the smell
of incense.

page 59

Dick Harris, Pa Henare, Eugene Harris & Pa Pere

Special thanks to the Sister Disciples of the Divine
Master who specialize in caring for sacred vestments.
They cleaned and restored and gave advice for future
care - all for aroha.
The evening entertainment was a Talent Quest and
Floor Show. The panel of judges were Bob Newson,
Winnie McMath and Annette Collier. Murray Korewha
with his yodelling won the first prize; The Blister Trio (The
Toko Sisters) were second and Nathan Warner was third.

Judges: Ngawini, Bob & Annette

Monday was programmed as a quiet day, with
spiritual and theological lectures and a music workshop
during the day. There were many positive comments
about the Maori Theology lecture by Pa Shirres. Those of
us who took part in the Music workshop found out that
it's not all that easy to make new hymns, but we enjoyed
the effort.
At 7pm we all gathered in the chapel for a Miha
Whakamaharatanga. We remembered all the deceased,
past members and pirihi of our marae and all the friends
and relatives. Pa Henare had a list of over three hundred
names. Ka hoki nga mahara ki a ratou, ka heke nga
roimata, ka tangi pai nga waiata.

JUBILEE DAY - 5th MARCH
We were up early welcoming manuhiri and rushing
about getting everything in order for the Jubilee Mass
and the banquet to follow. Te Unga Waka was host for
the day.
Seating was arranged in the foyer, and group after
group was welcomed until Bishop Denis arrrived with
other VIPs at 10.30. Notice the smiles all around. What
happy day it was! The church and foyer were packed
and over twenty pirihi concelebrated with Bishop Denis
Pa Ateriano, Pa Rawiri, Pa Tenehi Horrigan
arrival in the foyer-marae.

The Foyer becomes the Mahau o te whare

Te Kauwhau a Pihopa Tenihi

page 60

KO TE MIHA TIUPERI - TE TUREI
Fathers Laidler, Cushlow, Vercoe, Haring, Geboers, Te Awhitu, Bachmann,
Smyth, Skinner, Ryan, Urania, Taria, Pihopa Tenehi

Diane, Harriet Blair, Rehu Harris, Nadia Tapara, Vicky Kanara, Martha Rapira, Kataraina Kanara, Riva Mendes,
Huia Haeata, Marlene Hovell, Christine Mendes, Ivana Davis, Lisa Wimutu, Sandra Harris, Joanie Daniels,
Tania Kanara, Friend, Gina Ngakuru.
(Front) Valeria Edwards, Natalie Rapira, Colleen Noble, Aunti Puti, Tania Harata, Makarita Howard, Friend, Glenda Clark.

Lucy Hotere, Tony, Kate, Dave, Pa Hani, Paul, Moana,
Lucy Te Awhitu, Matiu, Pa Henare.

Motuti earning their Cake

Helping Pa Hani to get his cake.

page 61

Then we were called into the Hall where Puti, Nina and
Mahu and all their helpers had prepared a real banquet.
As we ate, concert parties entertained us on the stage;
Whai Ora, Pakipaki School and Te Ara Pounamu.
The Cake for the Silver Jubilee was made up of 25
sections. Pa Henare and Piripi arranged for different VIPs
and Old Friends to have the honour of cutting the cake.
We kept to the time-honoured custom of calling every
tribe and hapu and group to come forward and claim
their cake with a song. It was great impromptu
entertainments throughout the afternoon. And a very
enjoyable evening.
In the evening our Variety Show was started off by
Lew Clauson. Lew was involved originally in the early
days of fund raising. The Lew and Simon duo became
quite famous, but always kept an interest in Te Unga
Waka. He showed us that his talent is still there. Kia ora
Lew!

SPECIAL TABLES
Ada Harris, Liz Harris, Tracey Worwood, Judy Tuiloma
Auntie Puti Makiri

Lou Clauson great entertainer

Nina keeps an eye on the stew

John Turei, Pa Ryan, Lady Rose and her daughter on
either side of Dame Whina.

page 62

Te Whau was the host for Wednesday. (For those not
up with the play, Te Whau is the name of the Avondale
Catholic Maori Society.)
The day itself was designated the Rangatahi Day - for
the young people. It began on a very practical note with
lectures from people working In the Iwi Transition
Agency and the New Zealand Employment Service. In
the evening Archive Films were shown in the Kohanga
Reo Whare, dealing with the Hokianga, Rawene and the
old-time Waitangi Huihuinga.
Thursday was designated a day of rest, but the
kitchen was kept busy, with Pare Hauraki doing the
honours. Uncle Ben Tawhiti's band came along to
provide music for our cocktail evening.
Some families had arranged a Whakapapa Evening to
search their family genealogies. This was a good
opportunity with so many people coming together.
Friday had two main events, the Stations of the Cross
and the visit by the Aitutaki people.
The Stations of the Cross were dramatically illustrated
by the Poi from Christ the Maori. This was the first time it
had been done in Chapel and we wanted to see if it
could be performed while moving between the Stations
of the Cross. But we had to settle for a static
performance because of the crowd in the chapel and the
room needed to do the Poi. (Perhaps another time, in a
big church with plenty of room.)
Afterward we welcomed in the Aitutaki people. They
have strong links with Te Unga Waka, often using it as
their marae for important occasions like the Hair-Cutting
ceremonies. After the official welcome they gave us a
lightful colourful performance.
Whai Ora were the main hosts that day.

Catholic Women's League take their turn serving

Saturday was our Sports Day. Two buses took the
visitors over to Hato Petera. The Games proposed were
Netball, Basketball, Tennis, Table Tennis, Gold, Bowls,
Badminton, Rugby, League, Touch Rugby, a Marathon
and/or a fun run.

It was a most enjoyable day. Not all of the sports took
place, but some of us, with visions of our by-gone youth,
joined in the Touch Rugby. The Wests, coached by Pat
Mendes, came out the winners. The golf too was very
popular at the North Shore Links.
In the meantime, Housie was in full swing at Te Unga
Waka. This is our "Bread-Winner" which provides most
of the finance for our marae. For a while it was dying on
its feet, as less and less people turned up on Thursday
nights. But now we have it on Saturdays and it's very
popular again. Perhaps this is the time to put in a word
of praise for our Housie Committee. Over the years there
have been dedicated people who gave up many hours to
keep the housie running smoothly.
On Saturday evening we had Karakia first and then a
Variety Show called "Irirangi" - "Showcase in Motion".
With the Mangere Marae band, we had another fabulous
evening. Our hosts were the Catholic Women's League.

Taenga mai o Aitutaki

No time to turn round, Toby, Kathy & Nina

page 63

SUNDAY 10th March was the final day of celebration.

By nine o'clock the visitors were being welcomed in the
Foyer, until the arrival of our guest of honour, Pihopa
Takuira and his Ope. He was the main Celebrant for our
Wiha Whakawhetai. We have so much to be thankful for,
not least the great week of reunion.

Pinky Climo and Pa Henare welcome Pihopa Takuira

Then we were welcomed into the Hall where another
great Feast had been prepared. Considering the number
to be fed, the waitresses did a tremendous job. Maybe
ane shouldn't mention particular names, but we can't
thank Mahu Makiri and Nina enough, for their quiet work
over the pots and pans in the Kitchen.

Te Wairere o Tamaki

Enjoying a kai break

While we ate we were entertained by Manutaki, Ngati
Hine, Te Wairere o Tamaki, Te Puru o Tamaki,
Pukekiwiriki, Te Umere o te Aroha - you would go a 100
miles for entertainment like that. (Hope we haven't
missed out any group!)

Once more we crowded into the Chapel and
overflowed into the Foyer for Benediction of the Blessed
Sacrament. Once more the Latin hymns just flowed,and
the bells were rung at the right time! And the smell of
incense pervaded the air. We felt so holy!
And if that wasn't enough, we crowded back into the
Hall for the 53rd performance of Christ the Maori,
presented by Rangimarie with help from Bub Wehi and
Waka Huia
At 10.30 we closed the Jubilee Week with Supper,
closing speeches and the blowing out of the Jubilee
Candle by Dame Whina. It will be kept in the chapel and
lit on the final day of the Jubilee Year when we will have
a Silver Debutantes Ball - with Ben Tawhiti providing the
music.
Pihopa Takuira said the final prayer and gave us his
blessing but we didn't want to go home! There was such
a happy atmosphere. Hokianga whanau were the hosts
that day - which means nearly everyone, as there are
very few without some connection to Hokianga.
Kia Ora Rawa Atu Koutou Katoa
Ka kite ano a te Maehe e haere mai nei.
See you all at the Ball

page 64

DAYS OF OUR YOUTH
by Bob Newson

Manu Adams, Louis Brown, Weka Mason, Jerry Clark,
Gemma Kapeli, Bella McLean, Pa, Marietta K., Linda Bradfield

The Youth Club filled Te Unga Waka with life - youthful
life that made it a great place to be for the week-ends.
Solid foundation was set by the Committee of young
leaders, steered by Pa Henare. Leaders such as the late
Gerry Clarke, Weka Makiri (Mason), Marrietta Kapeli, to
mention a few, carried the Club to many sporting and
social events throughout Auckland, and visits to other
towns and cities.
The Youth Club had its constitution with definite goals
and objectives. It worked in well with the Executive
Committee of Te Unga Waka, who supported it very well.

Bella McLean (Parker), Alan Gaskell (NZBC) & Sam Pehi
Talent Quests were a lively activity. There were many
future Stars who began treading the boards at Te Unga
Waka - Erana Clarke, Yandall Sisters, Kake Sisters, the
late Butch Ruka. But the unsung Stars were those who
often made up the dwindling line-up in the early heats.
They were entered for a bet, maybe by their mate, or had
no money, and a prize, even a little one, would get them
a bus ticket home! There was also the wishful thinker,
the trier who entered, never won the money and ended
up walking home. It's a long way from Epsom to Titirangi
New Lynn, but we made it, (I'm not mentioning those
who lived in New Lynn or Titirangi!)

Mani Adams, the Puppeteer
The Radars - a Band of blind Musicians

Pike, the M.C.

Talented Youngsters

page 65

Hotting up
And the thoughts go back to those who made the
evenings - John Keogh with his Puppet Dance, Edward
Nlakiri and Pike Rapira (our answer to MC Hammer) and,
af course, the smooth voice of "Nat King Cole", the late
Butch Ruka. (Haere ra, e te hoa, e Butch, haere ki te
kapa waiata o te Rangi, haere, haere, haere.)

Bob, Marlene, Butch & Kathleen.
The spiritual life was in the guiding hand of Pa Henare.
Retreats, invited Guest Speakers and many pep talks
helped the taha wairua to grow. The whanau growth was
the greatest where the weak were helped by the strong.

Dormitory Discussion

AND SO TO THE SPORTS FIELD
Netball was the highlight. Training sessions taken by
Marrietta and Julie and Pa Henare and many other
co-coaches, enabled Te Unga Waka to field 6 Netball
teams. And, of course, wherever the girls went, the boys
followed. We often wondered whether they followed the
game or the girls. Whatever it was, Te Unga Waka had
the greatest Supporters Club of all. "GO WAKA!" was the
call heard at so many Netball courts.

THE CHAMPIONS

Margaret
Bernadette

Maria

Gemma

Kiri

Te Wake

Kite

Te Tai

Kapeli,

Marietta Kapeil

Pa Henare

Julie Adams
The teams performed to great heights, winning many
championships at the Catholic Netball Courts and in
many tournaments. The Blue and Gold colours were
outstanding on the Courts. The headlines in the sports
pages of the old 8 O'CLOCK papers were often "TE
UNGA WAKA CHAMPIONS", "TE UNGA WAKA
TOPPLES THE BEST", and many more.
It is good to look back and then forward again, to
those many young women who are now mothers, and
the skills that you learnt and gave to Te Unga Waka. You
can have the pleasure of watching your daughters take
up the same challenges. Even if you can't keep up with
them now, there's still the Golden Oldies Netball!
There were a few trips to the Chinese Restaurant in
Symonds Street to celebrate a win (only Take-Aways if
we'd had a loss!) and then back to Te Unga Waka for a
Social Evening or home, "Flied lice on the menu! (Calm
Adams).

Wise Men:
Harry, Percy & Butch

page 66

On Sundays, of course, there was the Mass at 11am,
but there was a growing demand for sporting contacts
and Field Days and After-Match Socials. This changed
the focus and inevitably, we splintered into different
groups, but the Whanau still grew.
The Boys, not to be outdone, became quite a
formidable force on the Rugby field. The Blue and Gold
were again to the fore with the support of GO WAKA. We
played enough games to keep us busy. In 1968, for
example, we played 11, It was a mixture of young and
old, but very spirited, with the likes of Toby Curtis at First
Five and Willie Parker, and Morgan Puru at Centre.
Morgan was the forerunner to Joe Stanley (who must
have been studying our man)! He was much respected
for his bone-crunching tackles. He was a smooth
running Centre. Joe Whiu at fullback was as safe as a
Church. The Hostel Boys from Dommet Ave, Dominion
and Owens Roads, formed the bulk of our players. Often
they had to miss the socials (Shame!) to get back to their
hostels in time; otherwise it was a telling-off, or even
getting locked out.

TE UNGA WAKA FOOTBALL TEAM
Toia, Peter Tamepo, Pat Peita, Toi Rapira, Nick Adams,
Jerry Clark, Maurice Toetoe, Manu Adams,
John Williams, Pat Larkins, Toby Curtis, Percy Davis,
Louis Brown, Bob Newson, Jim Sarich

Although we don't like to admit it, we've slowed down
and have a tough job keeping up with our sons. Like the
Mothers, we still try to prove something by joining the
Golden Oldies.
Kia ora to Bruce Wynyard, Wally Palmer, Peter
Tamepo, Vaevae, Maurice Toetoe, Mike Jones, John
Fisher and so many others. Of course, there was the
main Power-house of the Forwards, with the likes of Pat
Peita, tall, stalwart and tough in the mould of Andy
Haden - Manu Adams, head banded like Buck Shelford -
Calm Adams (Nick) always on the loose ball, and
calming the stirrers in the pack who often picked fights,
but left them to Manu and Mike Tipene to finish, like the
ferrets Bobby Newson, Louis Brown and Percy Boar
Davis.

These three came to be a force to reckon with on the
field - and off the field. There was an occasion in
Pakanae, Whirinaki, where the Referee lost control, but
with a difference. He blew the whistle as he saw the
back end of Percy in hot pursuit of the two so-called
friends into the ti-tree, to belt them for calling him Boar
on the field.

Reggie Lucien, Jackie Mangakahia
(mokopunas of Sarah and Sonny Welsh)

MUSIC MAKING
Many bands became the favourite musicians of the
time, and to this very day one of the Bands continues to
play on. I refer, of course, to The Impacts, with the music
of Taku Adams, Tori Adams, Teddy Adams and Tau
Adams. There were also the Radars, the blind musicians,
who were the Rave of the time. The Magakahia's, Lucia,
Jackie and Family. There were the Cooks, Brian and
Boxer and their Band, and, still going strong is Ben
Tawhiti and his Band. Chuck and Howard Morgan
displayed the Classic Guitars. The Bradfields, with Millie
singing, Linda and Mary followed in Mum's footsteps.
Many a professional guitarist can take a bow to Johnny
Bradfield, such a talented professional!

Manu and Jerry Clark (killed tragically)

page 67

OTHER SPORTS

Table tennis, Billiards, Badminton, Bowls and Judo all
had their devotees. Judo especially, was enjoyed by all,
and our big hero was Mike Tipene, the Commonwealth
Champion.

Memories remain of a humming, youthful community
Youth Centre, Sport was our life.

Jeff Stevens, Willie Pairama, Willie Birch

Jack Perry, Tama Lundon, Robert Davis,
Lyn and Jan Lundon

Our Commonwealth Champion
Mike Tipene works out with Jim Edwards.

TE TAHA MAORI
Every Sunday the hall echoed to the sound of Action
Songs and Haka, Poi and Patere. At that time Johnnie
Tapiata was our main coach. He composed many of our
songs and brought in specialists to help us. Peter
Awatere wrote a play for us which we performed at
Western Springs. At that time Waitangi Day was not a
national holiday. It was called Northland Day, and
Colonel Awatere felt this was not good enough. So we
had this play of the Signing of the Treaty. Uncle Eric was
resplendent in top hat and tails. I forget who he
represented, but he signed the Treaty with great aplomb.
We also had great tutors in whai-korero, Totoni and
Wiki, and sometimes Tim Davis. Dave and Dickie Hotere
were the experts who showed us the art of the Wero
(Challenge).
The girls specialised in tukutuku and weaving. Some
of the older ladies came along to teach. I remember
especially Maisie Shelford who was so dedicated. She
made the Holy Family panel for the Chapel and the
Stations of the Cross. Pa Henare got quite good,
considering that Whina once told him, "E Pa, ko koe
tetahi pirihi dumb mo te mahi tukutuku!"
The boys learned carving, but I'm afraid I wasn't a
good pupil for Morgan Puru who was our tutor. My mind
was on other pursuits, if you know what I mean.

Kateraina's Wedding: He aha kei taku uma?

Weka entertains,
backed by Lorraine Timoko

page 68

Marietta and Weka

There is much that can be written about the Youth
Club, but the greatest of all was the growing spirit of
Whanau. As youth, we were Brother and Sister who
cared for each other, in good times and in bad times,
and believe it, there was plenty of both. Through the
blessings that we received many members chose their
partners for life from within the Youth Club. Some moved
to chosen careers, to the South Island, the Meatworks,
Army, Trades. The branches of the tree were stretching
out alright. To adapt a phrase: Ko te Taura whiri a Te
Unga Waka. Everywhere you go you meet someone who
remembers those days of the Youth Club. Of course you
want to go back sometimes to the fun and fitness of
those days, but as Kupe said, "E hoki a Kupe?" It's no
use hankering after our lost youth, but the spirit, ae, me
hoki ki te wairua whakawhanaunga o aua ra.
The Silver Jubilee Celebrations were like a Reunion.
But it would be nice to have a special Reunion for the old
Youth Club, to see where we all are these days. It might
help some more to become supporters of the Rangatahi
today, as others supported us in our days. Let us pray
for our Youth today, for theirs is a greater fight in a more
eventful and more bountiful world, engari he Ao Hurihuri.
Hei kupu whakamutunga. Kia ngawari mai ki a au mo
enei tuhituhinga. Kahore ekore, kua wareware i a au
tahi o oku hoa.

Pike, Grace, Gemma, Toi, Davey

Phoebe and Mum

Gemma and Charlene

Shelly and Reg

Julie, Charlene & Maxine

page 69

Totoni & Tim Davis adjudicating

The Yandell Sisters at Te Unga Waka 1970
The first steps on the road to fame

Doc Toia shows them how

A very young star: Erana Clark

AN EARLIER YOUTH CLUB
Who can you recognize?
Jack Campbell, Dave King, Steve
Campbell, Ted Rapira, Jane Mendes,
Beulah Matthews, Huia Beasley,
Betty Beasley, Harry Cassidy, Millie
Mendes, Frances Heremaia, Miria
Cassidy, Miria Hotere, Dicky Hotere,
Mary (Kuia) Campbell, Olive, Sarah
Dunne, Bully.
In the Maori Club picture Wiki is
standing in the background.

page 70

PA PATERIKI

FATHER PAT DUNN
Tena ra koutou katoa, e te iwi o Te Unga Waka. He
mihi whanui tenei ki a koutou katoa, E kui ma, e koro ma,
e te Rangatahi tae noa ki nga mokopuna. Tena koutou i
te wa hari nei o to koutou, me ki pea, o tatou marae o Te
Unga Waka. Tena koutou katoa, huri noa, huri noa, oku
whanaunga i roto i te Whanau o Hehu Karaiti. Tena
koutou.
I was at Te Unga Waka during 1976 and 1977, and still
ather loosely 1978/9 while based at Mangere East
parish. I came there first as a Deacon, to broaden my
knowledge of pastoral work, but what I found was a
family which adopted me as one of their own boys.
When I was ordained in April 1976, Wiki led a big group
to Remuera where the Ordination took place, Rangimarie
was there and friends from Mangere. And afterwards the
first speech I made as a Priest was in Maori. I must have
been "maia" in those days!
I felt Te Unga Waka, with Maori family and Mill Hills,
was a marvellous place in which to begin living as a
priest. It was always a warm, lively and happy set-up.
While other priests with whom I was ordained were
doing "ordinary" parish things, I was tripping around the
country with Rangimarie and "Christ The Maori"; it was
great fun!
While at Te Unga Waka I was always connected with
Mangere. It was a bit of a standing joke that I belonged
to Ngati Mangere (The Lazy Tribe). And I have many fond
memories of "Mangere Catholic Maori Society". We had
some lovely times together. They say that a priest leaves
his heart in his first parish and his books in the second.
It's true !!

When I think now of Te Unga Waka, my mind turns to
many who have passed on ... probably most notably
Sister Marie Chanel, but so many others such as Charlie
Shelford, Martha Cash, Jack Russel, Pa Teo, Pa Matiu,
Julie Adams ... etc, etc. E moe koutou. E moe i roto i to
tatou Ariki. Tena, kei te haere mai te wa ka tutaki ano
tatou i a tatou, te wa hakari nui i te marae o to tatou Ariki
me tona Whaea. E moe, e moe, e moe.

I was always touched by the aroha shown to me, as a
young priest, and a pirihi Pakeha at that! May I extend
my greetings to all involved with the present Jubilee Year
and wish you every blessing, and my prayer is that Te
Unga Waka will continue to be te unga rangimarie mo
nga waka katoa o te motu.

Tena koutou, tena koutou, tena tatou katoa.

page 71

PA PETERA
Deacon at Te Unga Waka
Tena koutou te lwi o Te Unga Waka. All my best
wishes to you on the occasion of you Silver Jubilee.
My connection with Te Unga Waka began when
Bishop Mackey thought it would be a good if Pat Dunn
and I had three months each at Te Unga Waka, as
deacons, before ordination. That was from November
1975 through to January 1976, Pa Geboers was number
1 then. I think Pa Gerry Mertens went away soon after I
arrived!
My first Saturday there, I had to go out to a
house-warming in Avondale/New Lynn with Gerry and
Jim McGrath, followed by a hangi, then a wedding at Te
Atatu and another hangi. Then I remember just getting
back to Renall Street - to spend half an hour on the loo!
I enjoyed my time there (Te Unga Waka of course!). I
remember Rangimarie, with Manu and family and Pio
and Chrissy, and Volley Ball on Fridays nights at Waka.
- A week-end with Janus (Pa Ateriona) down to
Taumarunui, to open the Meeting House where two of
the poupou had been carved by him. (I first met Jim
Bolger there.)
Going out to Mangere and visiting homes with
Margaret Stininato with her "little" boys in tow.
- Trying to learn a little Maori language with help of
the families.
- The busload of people who came through to Te
Aroha for my Ordination - much appreciated.
- The Sunday 11am Masses with the meal afterwards.
- Hans (Pa Hani) playing cards at Waka
warm Mill Hill hospitality
- Becky and Waimarie cooking and house-keeping for
us at Manukau Road, with Becky's Mum, Marion.

Pa Petera & Pa Pateriki

-buying my first car, a Viva that Mick Ryan had
owned - via McHugh himself for $2,400 (when the
maximum you could borrow from the Clergy Trust Fund
was $2,500). It went well till Easter 1977, when I cracked
the head on the way to Taupo.
- playing golf with Pa Geboers at Chamberlain Park.
- Housie at Waka on Thursday nights.
All these thoughts come rushing to mind when I think
of those days. The only trouble with them - they went too
quickly.
Remember me to all my old friends - some of them
have gone to their rest. We say good-bye to them, and
to the kanohi ora may I say Kia kaha! Kia Maia! (Is my
Maori O.K .? )

Aroha nui,

Pa Petera Hay-MacKenzie

FATHER SULLIVAN
Te Unga Waka
My Whare Wananga
To the Catholic Maori people of Auckland and
especially to my whanaunga at Te Unga Waka, best
wishes for your Silver Jubilee Celebrations.
He mihi nui ki a koutou, aku kuia, koroua me te
whanau katoa i tenei wa hari nui.
I believe the Holy Spirit is leading you to do brave and
exciting work in the next bracket of years. Can we get
closer to you in our Suburban Parishes?
I am always grateful for the "finishing off" work you and
did in my time with you - as a Deacon and a New Priest
The "Maori Mission" is a special Seminary on
"Wananga".
Many Blessings! Kia nui nga manaaki a te Runga
Rawa ki a koutou katoa.
Aroha nui,

page 72

HUI-TE-RANGIORA
89 Clarence St,
Hamilton
He mihi tenei na te teina ki te tuakana. Ko
Hui-Te-Rangiora, kei te mihi atu ki Te Unga Waka i tenei
wa o te Tiuperi Hiriwa. Tena koutou katoa.
It was great to have the opportunity to express our
support and to congratulate the Committee on the
happy atmosphere of the celebrations.
I was part of the preparations, being with the Tamaki
Mission Team in the early 60s. Everyone was getting into
the act, with Queen Carnivals, Mokopuna Carnivals,
Kaumatua-Kuia Carnivals, drawing support form all over,
even as far as Thames. I remember Lulu's mokopuna
winning one of them. Dame Whina used to ring up and
say, "E Pa, you free now? Can you come and take me to
Glen Innes? ... Te Atatu? ... Avondale?" It wasn't really a
question. My little VW was our trusty steed. "Whina, how
do you know all these people?" "Oh they are all my
relations."
I got to know so many fine people, Meria and Wiki,
Raiha and Buck Tipene and all the people of the Legion
of Mary. I'd better stop there, or I'll never get to the end
of them.
I remember the search for a name for our Centre.
Several names had been suggested. Then one day
Whina rang up Pa Matiu. "I've got a name, e Pa. This is
the one, Te Unga Waka."
God bless you for all your efforts to help each other
and to help the new generation growing up.

MARAE

Ko koutou nga kuia me nga kaumatua o nga tau kei te
haere mai. No reira, kia kaha, kia maia! Tena koutou,
nga waka e u mai nei ki te unga o nga waka. Tena
koutou katoa.

Aroha na nui

Pa Kereti - Fr G Haring

Charlie Hovell greets Pa Kereti

Pa Kereti earning his cake

page 73

LEGION OF MARY
by Cecilia Lundon

SILVER JUBILLE OF THE LEGION OF MARY 1967
BACK: Joe Henare, Pa Wiremu Tuerlings, Dick Thomas, Rata Topia,
Fr McRory, Tim Adams, Joe Korewha, Dave King, Frank Brown, Joe Nuku, Fr Duggan, Pa Matiu,
Luke Brown, Rita Hunia, Fr Aarts, Elsie Brown, Millie Rudolph, Kate Mendes, Kuini Matthews,
Rachel Korewha, Isabella Matthews, Agnes Howard, Api Toia, Aki Hotere, Liza Harema, Bella,
Rachel Matthews, Violet Brown & Sandra, Pa Petera.
Liza Tipene, June Mclntosh, Lizzie Adams, Ada Peri, Sue Campbell, Violet Williams, Louise Nuku, Emma
Marsters, Ma Makiri, Maria Noa, Whina Martin, Winnie Te Tai, Martha Rapira,
Peka Thompson & mokopunas.
(Mrs Field and Mrs Soloman and several other visitors are present.
The missing ones are in the kitchen getting tea ready.)

Tena koutou katoa, nga tuakana, teina i tenei tau
Tiuperi o to tatou nei marae o Te Unga Waka. Tenei te
mihi atu nei ki a koutou, me te whakaaro ano hoki ki a
ratou, kua hinga, kua ngaro i a tatou. Heoiani, a te wa o
to tatou Ariki, ka tutaki ano tatou i a ratou. Haere e nga
mate, haere, haere, haere.
In the years when our families were first settling in
Auckland, the Legion of Mary played an important part in
keeping us in touch with each other. In these days our
youngsters might wonder what the title "Legion of Mary"
means. So let me give you a little explanation.
The Legion was started in Ireland by a layman, Frank
Duff in the 1920s. Its philosophy is based on the place of
Mary in the life of Jesus. If Jesus could trust her so
completely to live nine months in her womb and spend
his childhood at her knee, his respect for her is still the
same. So the group which he founded would work with
Mary to bring people to her son Jesus. It was an
association run by ordinary people with the help of a
priest as chaplain.

The name was taken from the
Roman Army, called the Legion.
Different titles were also taken
from the same source. For ex-
ample, each local group was
called a Praesidium which was the
name given to a special Task
Force in the Roman Legion. But
this was to be an army for God,
armed only with the weapons of
prayer and aroha.

Vexillum Legionis

Pa Tewano (Fr O'Callaghan) introduced the Maori
Legion in Auckland, with Charlotte Cassidy as the first
President. To be a Legionary you had a three months
trial period. You attended the weekly, 90 minutes
meeting, said the daily prayers of the Legion and did two
hours work in the week. We used St Patrick's as our
centre. We gathered there to give our reports and be
given our work for the coming week. We had to study
the handbook to imbibe the proper Legion spirit. We
were, "Sister Topia, Brother Hotere, etc ... " to each
other.
The first thing we learned was the spiritual character of
the work. We visited hospitals and homes, Mt Eden
prison and Oakley Mental Home. It also included doing
door to door census in the city. Pa Tewano, by himself,
could never discover all the new Catholic families
coming into the City, but with our backing, he knew
where most people were.

The Family Rosary

page 74

Most of us found this a difficult job. We'd go out in pairs
and each take a side of the street and go and knock on
every door! You got a few people who slammed the door
in your face. We all had our own funny stories to tell, like
"When I came to number 49, it was a saw-mill and I
didn't know where to knock : President: "Why didn't you
'knock on wood"? Ha ha!" If there were too many
houses with no one at home, Pa Tewano would ask us to
go back at a time when they would be home.

LEGIO MARIAE

A Legion activity in many poor countries. Providing good
books where people wait for the bus,
or in a market place.

On all visitations the idea was to introduce oneself as
a member of the Legion of Mary and if the vibes were
right you invited them to become an auxiliary member.
These were members who said the prayers each day,
but did not take part in the weekly meetings or the work
programmes.
I sounds easy enough, but for many of us it was very
tough learning how to introduce yourself to people you
didn't know. When there were plenty of us, we did
regular visits to all the hospitals around Auckland, even
as far out as Middlemore, (which required two buses to
get there) and to all the private hospitals. But when our
numbers were fewer, we would go on visitation when we
heard that someone was in hospital. It was the same
with Oakley Mental Hospital. The Pt Chevalier
praesidium, which looked after Oakley, invited our Maori
praesidium to help with their visiting when some of the
patients were Maori.

Sister Lundon

I was fortunate in having Mrs Liza Tipene among my
mentors in the early days. In one street we visited
several homes where Liza was known. But she kept off
any spiritual talk. In fact, they seemed mostly to swap
ideas about the form of race-horses. Later on I realised
that these families would have resented being asked
anything about religion, and Liza's friendly chatter
helped them to keep in touch for the times when they
really needed their Faith. Perhaps I shouldn't quote Liza,
because she was a rule unto herself. But what a
character! If only we had some more like her now! She
also knew every corner dairy, because you knew when
visitation was over, Liza took you to the nearest dairy for
a lovely big ice-cream. And, never mind if the bus you
were going to catch had already taken off! Liza would
stand out in the road and with one wave of her hand
would bring them to a stop. The drivers all knew her and
her "God bless you, darling".

Sister Tipene makes sure we are all fed.

The only one who had a car was John Ryan and it was
a sad day when he and Rosie went to live in Otahuhu.
They formed a praesidium for that area. The Senatus
(Central Committee) had been asking us to divide up,
because we had a large number of members. But we
were happy working together, and we only split up when
we went to live in more distant areas. Kuini Matiu and
Bella and Joe Harris started the Maori praesidium in
Manurewa. After a while, when Whai Ora became
established, Otahuhu split into two.

The Legion Jubilee Cake
Wiri, Miria, Bubbles, Bp Liston, Taria (Pat),
Fr Tuerlings, Fr Aarts

page 75

From Kaumatua Dave King

A very active group formed in Puhinui, with Harry and
Miria Cassidy, Violet and Lucky Williams, Monty and Rita
Hunia, Liza and John Zarich, Joe and Kuini Matthews,
lke and Martha Topia, Kiri Topia and Martha Matthews.

This was Pa Matiu's group and they had a wonderful
spirit.

Miria & Liza (with the hairdo)

The term for President was three years. After that you
could be elected for another term, but then you had to
stand aside for someone else. When Charlotte's term
ended, Miria Hotere became President. She did two
terms and then Wiki was elected. After his term I took
over and had two terms.
One of the rules was that as Legionaries we were not
allowed to handle money in any shape or form. This was
because it kept our motives pure and no one could
accuse us of being in it for the money. This rule caused a
few problems when we were drumming up support for
the building of our Maori centre. Some people thought
that if we were already visiting homes, we could sell
raffle tickets or collect "votes" for the different Queens.
But we stuck with the rule. If we wanted to take part in
the money raising, (and most of us did), then we had to
do it at another time and not as Legionaries.
We younger members had a great example from the
elders like Aki Hotere, Joe Topia and his wife. They were
so full of faith.

Besides visiting we were given the work of organising
Retreats, especially the women's Retreat, which was
always a great success. At these Retreats we would
meet other Maori women from all over the country.
(Here is part of a report October 1964)
The four Maori Praesidia of the Legion of Mary in the
city and suburbs are continuing their wonderful apostolic
work among their own people, bring the Rosary Crusade
to homes, visiting new areas, arranging instructions and
Baptisms and in many other ways helping the priests in
their parish work. Some 40 Catholic Maori are working
as Active Members, assisted by many Auxiliaries. The
Maori Praesidia are also arranging another pilgrimage to
Russell to take place at Labour Weekend.

Another activity which we undertook was to take part
in the CCD (Confraternity of Christian Doctrine.) June
and I were asked to take the courses being offered then
by Father (later Bishop) Mackey and Father Donnelly. I
must confess that after a day's work in the tannery,
Father's gentle voice, teaching us about church history
was like a lullaby! Also at this time there was the tragic
car smash when June's husband was killed and she
herself spent a long time in hospital.
The years have passed now. Styles have changed. But
the value and work of the Legion is still needed. There's
still need to visit hospitals and prisons and people
confined to home or young families that need contacts in
the big city. Perhaps some charismatic person from our
families will come up with a new impetus.
The Legion is still doing traditional work in New
Zealand, but also tackling modern problems like
street-kids and drugs. It's also helping in many countries
with poor living standards, where they are turning back
to their spiritual roots. In the most recent Legion
magazines you can read of the excellent work being
done in places we hardly known about ... Ghana,
Nigeria, Liberia, Benin, Gabon, Chad ... One report from
Liberia reads: " ... visited prison compounds ... went
into Refugee Home ... manned a Book Barrow in the
market

.. helped with alcoholics." Uganda has had
more than its share of problems, but it has a Legion
membership of 26,000 plus another 10,000 Auxiliaries.
May I finish this article by remembering all those lovely
people who have gone to their reward. Haere e nga
mate, haere ki to tatou Whaea ki a Maria ki tana Tamaiti
hoki, a Hehu. Haere, haere, haere. Also to those
members still with us, thank you for the great work you
did, and which some of you are still doing.
May Te Unga Waka become again a centre and a
source of inspiration for everyone. Many Happy Returns
of your Birthday and Silver Jubilee. Kia Kaha, Kia toa, kia
manawanui hoki. Tena koutou, kia ora mai ano tatou.

Ladies Retreat

page 76

GREETINGS FROM PA MIKAERE SHIRRES
Tena ra koutou e nga iwi te noho mai na i runga i nga
kupu ohaki a o koutou tupuna. Tena koutou e nga
morehu waihotanga ake o nga iwi nunui o nehe i rere mai
i Hawaiki, a i whakawhiti mai ki Aotearoa nei, ki tena
takutai, ki tena takutai. Tena waka, tena waka, tena
koutou katoa.
Te Unga Waka tena koe. For twenty-five years you
have been te unga waka o Tamaki Makaurau. For many
who have died in Tamaki Makaurau and elsewhere, you
have been a resting place on their way home. No reira, e
nga mate, ma te whetu ariki o te ao, koutou e arahi ki te
tauranga pai, ki te "urunga e kore e whakaarahia hau
kino".
For us, living in Tamaki Makaurau, you have been
sometimes a resting place, and sometimes a place of
very strong winds. I think of the strong winds at the time
of the land march, and at other times as well.
In 1982 we joined Te Runanga Whakawhanaunga i
Nga Hahi, the national Maori ecumenical body."More
and more you have come to know of Te Runanga and its
commitment to Maori issues. Most importantly, they
have perceived, in its Christian character, a sense of
justice which gives credibility to the Gospel." It was Wiki
Hotere who led us into full and equal partnership with Te
Runanga Whakawhanaunga and members of Te Unga
Waka who carried it through.
1983 saw the establishment of Te Runanga o Te Hahi
Katorika ki Aotearoa, which owes much to the work. of
the people who were at that time the leaders of Te Unga
Waka. From this there followed the consecration of
Bishop Takuira Mariu as the first Maori Catholc Bishop.
In 1986 there was the Maori, not just Catholic, powhiri
to Pope John Paul II, welcoming him to Aotearoa. The
leaders of Te Unga Waka were responsible for that
welcome. It took a lot of faith and guts to have the Maori
right to welcome the Pope recognised, and the welcome
itself so magnificently carried out.

Fathers Mick Browne, Shirres, Wanders, Cushlow

This year is the year of the Maori Pastoral care Plan,
now presented to the Bishops for their approval. Much
of the detail of the Pastoral Care Plan and the Catholic
principles on which it is based, can be found in the
preamble and the objectives of the 1985 draft
Constitution for the Auckland Catholic Maori Society,
then based at Te Unga Waka.
I am sure there will be many more strong winds
blowing around Te Unga Waka.
No reira, tena koutou me te matauranga!
Tena koutou me te whakapono!
Tena koutou me te aroha mau tonu!

Greeting Pa Wiremu

page 77

Greetings from St. Anne's
Manurewa
It was a very happy occasion to meet lots of old
friends on March 5th at Te Unga Waka. But at the same
time there was an element of sadness, because so many
faces were missing, - all those lovely people who had
been so much a part of the history of Te Unga Waka, but
who have now gone to their reward.
Our family became connected with the Maori
community around Manurewa. We were newcomers in a
strange land and so were the Maori people because the
city and suburbs were frightening places to them,
compared with their quiet country settlements. We were
very friendly with Joe and Bella Harris, Joe and Nani Te
Awhitu, Joe Korewha and his wife, Eileen, Bella's sister

Gran and husband Steve Paparoa and quite a few
others.

Welcome e ko!
Joe & Bella, Kees & Martha

It was fun working with people who had a purpose in
life - to build a Maori Centre. We had Queen Carnivals
and a Concert with Kiri Te Kanawa who had just won the
Mobil Sun Quest. We sold far more tickets than the
regulations allowed for our parish hall! But what a night it
was!
Our efforts weren't always successful though.
Someone on the Committee had a bright idea to have a
fund-raising Gala Dinner. We would do it like the
American Election Campaigners - so much a plate. £10
was decided on. That was an awful lot of money in those
days. Letters went out to "rich" people and the business
community. The letters looked beautiful. They even had
Bishop Liston's letterhead, no less! Most did not even
reply, we received a couple of £10 donations. It was a
grandiose flop! Half the Committee couldn't even afford
to go. The only one who benefited from this venture was
Bella Harris. She'd had her teeth removed a while before
this, and, so far, hadn't saved enough for the dentures.
We couldn't allow one of our leaders to go along to a
posh "do" without teeth, so we have a "whip-around"
and came up with enough for Bella to get her full set. At
the next meeting we were all sitting round looking
miserable about the sad outcome of our efforts, but one
person was able to show a toothy grin! In the end, she
made us all cheer up.

Martha Van Der Vooren
Although Kees, my husband and I did not care much
for Housie, we helped organise the Housie evenings in
our parish hall on the basis of 50% to St Anne's and
50% to Te Unga Waka. Quite an eye-opener for us, with
some people playing four or five cards per game all
evening.
An offshoot of these activities was the formation of Te
Ropu o Hata Ani, the Maori Club of St Anne's School,
Manurewa. It started in 1970 with between 40 and 50
members. Mrs Kathleen Waru was leader and Mr Bill
Carter was President - both now deceased. As St Anne's
did not have that many Maori pupils, most group
members were Pakeha, who threw themselves with
great gusto into haka and action songs, and the girls
became quite expert with the poi. We mothers made the
costumes from real flax piupiu (no drinking straw ones
for our club!) to diligently worked tipare headbands,
sashes and bodices. The group took part in
competitions in Te Unga Waka - a great way for parents
and children of different races to mix and learn together
The children also performed for the elderly folk in
Greenlane and Middlemore Hospitals. It was good while
it lasted.

The little warrior
So thank you very much for the invitation to the recent
festivities. It was lovely to see old friends. It was good to
see that the spirit of Te Unga Waka is still alive and well
May it continue to support each new generation as it
comes along.
Kia ora,
Many Happy Returns,

(Mrs Martha van der Voorn, Manurewa)

page 78

TE KORERO A PA HENARE
(Interview with Pa Henare)
(The success of our Silver Jubilee owed much to Pa
Henare. His guidance and influence could be seen in all
the events of the week's rejoicing, spiritual, cultural,
praying and entertaining. His enthusiasm and energy
were infectious.
No reira e tika ana kia mihi atu tatou ki a ia mo tana
whakapau kaha mo tatou i tenei wa.
So instead of giving him more work to do writing an
article for this magazine, we just sat down with the
tape-recorder and taped a little conversation about the
future of Te Unga Waka.)

Pa Henare tired out
after a weekend of music-making

PA HENARE: There'll always be a need for Te Unga
Waka, because we will always need he waahi huihuinga
mo te whanau me te hapuu. Individual families can
gather themselves together for their own purposes, but
they will always need to reach out to the wider hapuu.
They cannot cope with functions of the hapuu in their
own homes. The mana which comes from hapuu has to
be seen and exercised on the marae - like Te Unga
Waka and other marae.
Hence on a whanau basis, Te Unga Waka is needed,
because an individual whanau is not self-sufficient. They
need to reach out to hapuu and even to iwi, at times. It
has to be so, because if we don't, we are failing to
acknowledge the common tupuna of the whole people
and are cutting ourselves off. If we cut ourselves off from
iwi, we lose the strength of the iwi, and there are times
when that strength is needed.

E teka ana Koe, Joe!

I see Te Unga Waka as being that gathering place but I
also see the challenge to our whanau to make Te Unga
Waka theirs - not just to use, as you might hire a public
hall - but to own as part of themselves. There has to be a
commitment of the hapuu to the place where they
gather, otherwise they might as well be tauiwi.

The challenge for those elected to run Te Unga Waka
(and that should be all the whanau), is to make it a real
resource place for the people; to provide and store
information, and to have the mana to call people mo nga
take e pa ana ki a ratou. In this way it will be what it was
meant to be. The essential element is that commitment.

If it is not there, kahore tatou e pono ana - and if we are
not pono, then there will be no tika either. And if we
don't have tika and pono there will be no aroha and we
won't survive.

Te Unga Waka must be supported by the people and
Te Unga Waka must serve the people.

Compere of Christ the Maori

1965 Hui Aranga,
Pa Henare, Pa Wiremu, Pa Hemi

page 79


AUNTIE MARTHA

WAHINE RANGATIRA

In August a couple of years ago, Lucy and Matt Hotere,
Pa Ryan and a few others were keeping vigil beside the
bed of Martha Cash. She had been admitted to hospital
real with circulation problems and was going downhill.

Suddenly, she woke up. "Where am I Am I still in
hospital? Aue! I thought I was in heaven."

Martha had a simple faith in Jesus and his holy Mother. This life was just the waiting room for eternal life.
That was why she was so disgusted to find herself still in the hospital room with her aching legs! However, she
didn't have to wait long. Within a week she had gone to God.

The chapel at Te Unga Waka was packed with people;
many Sisters of different religious Orders came to say
good-bye, representatives of the Catholic Women's
League came and 25 Mill Hill Fathers. Her family and
friends took her back to Waihapa, the family home.
Haere ra e kui. Haere ki te kainga i ngakaunuitia ai hei
nohoanga mou. Haere ki te whanau tapu, ki tou Whaea a
Hata Maria, a, ki ou kuia koroua, karangatanga maha.
Haere, haere, haere.

Martha Cash, Christine Watt, Youth Leader
450 youth gathered at Te Unga Waka

Martha was special. One couldn't help being uplifted
by her presence. She had absolutely no artificial side to
her character. If you tried to be crafty or devious, Martha
would see through you in a flash - and, best of all, she
would make you laugh at yourself and see the
shallowness of your clever schemes.
Her straightforward style endeared her to the groups
she joined. The Catholic Women's League were reluctant
to have a special Maori unit at Te Unga Waka. But when
they heard Martha relating her deep spirituality to her
taha Maori, they realised that this special charisma
blossomed best in a Maori setting.

Not many people knew that Martha had been a Nun
for over ten years. She was a founding member of the
Maori Religious Sisters started in 1935. They were a
branch of the Marist Sisters who were teaching in the
school in Waitaruke at that time. Eventually it was hoped
that enough girls would join so that they could be
independent and have their own Leadership and
Formation Team.
Martha joined at the same time as Sister Dorothy (Kare
Petera). There were five in that first group. They trained
as teachers as well as learning to be Nuns.

Martha & Dorothy with Bp Liston
The strict timetable was something they weren't used
to; rising before dawn to recite the Office ad meditate;
having meals exactly on time every day and in silence
while someone read from a holy book. Everything was
regulated; the way you walked, the way you talked, the
way you wore the habit. From Night Prayers to Breakfast
the next morning was the Grand Silence when you talked
only to God. Martha's family was very strong in their
belief of Christ. Her brother Tom I, also known as
Noema, was a leading Katekita. Her parents were
Waironga and Mei.

Waitaruke Novitiate
Martha enjoyed the spiritual aspects of the life, but
questioned some of the human values which seemed to
be excluded. This came to a head when her mother died.
The tangi was in the meeting house, just a couple of
minutes walk from their house on the hill. But the rules of
the Sisters would not allow her to attend. She would be
able to go to the funeral, accompanied by two other
Nuns. While this might have made sense in the day
when the rules were first formulated, in 19th century
France, it went against all Martha's Maori values. So
there and then she told the Mother Superior that she
would have to finish. She confided in friend Kare, who
said to her that she had done very well in giving it a good
try for over ten years. So Martha packed up her few
possessions and went home.

page 80

Martha & Sister Dorothy in the garden.

The idea of a special separate Order did not succeed
because several other Maori girls who wanted to
become Teaching or Nursing Sisters, went to othe
Religious Orders like the Sisters of Mercy or the Sisters
of St Joseph. Kare, whom we have known for many
years as Sister Dorothy, joined the Marist Sisters.

Maori Catholic Youth Club Netball Team
Martha came to Auckland where she worked mostly
looking after the sick and elderly. She became a good
supporter of Pa Tewano in his work among the Maori
people. At this time Ron Cash began to accompany her
everywhere and proposed marriage. "No," said Martha,
"I'm too old!" But Ron persisted. He recognised that
special character in Martha which cared for everybody
"I need you to mother me," he said. So in the end she
gave in, so long as Ron understood that her Maori
people came first in her life.

Ron and Martha

Martha loved to take care of people.

Proverbs - He whakatauki
He rei nga niho, he paraoa nga kauae.
This was a favourite proverb of Pa Teo when he wanted
to encourage people or to comment on a big project.
The decisions were the teeth (nga niho); they look like tusks (he
rei) - so there must be the jawbone of a whale (he paraoa
holding them all together!
He nui maunga, ekore e taea te whakaneke
He ngaru moana, ma te ihu o te waka e wahi
This proverb was used by Pa Kereti Aarts when he was
at Hato Petera College, to tell the pupils to go about things
in the right way. A big project might look daunting like
mountain (he nui maunga), but if you think of it as a huge
wave (he ngaru moana), your canoe prow (te iho o te waka)
will slice through it.
He tumu herenga waka, no runga, no raro
A proverb used by our Kaiarahi, Eddie Tapara from
Taranaki, when any particular group wanted to claim
Unga Waka - "No, Te Unga Waka is the anchorage for
north or south people."
He toa takitini taku toa, ehara i te toa takitahi
A significant group of our people are from Ngati
Kahungunu. This was a saying of their famous leader Tutohu
Ariki. It was made into a song by Kingi lhaka's father. Our
strength is that of the whole group - not just of the star
performer.

page 81

The poi expert

Martha with group arriving in Mosgiel

First blessing by Pa Henare

Martha Cash & Bernadette Kite

Martha was an early member of Rangimarie and
went everywhere for Concerts and Christ the
Maori. She was also very active in fund-raising.
She and Sadie Hussey used to gather great bales
of second-hand clothes to make money for the
projects at Te Unga Waka. One day she got
worried that Sadie hadn't phoned for a few days,
so she called Bobby Newson and Pa Ryan. They
climbed in the window and found Sadie lying there
quite dead, with her little dog who was very
pleased to see us. The house was stacked with
second-hand clothing for the next money-raising effort.
There were sad moments in her life, but she
transformed them by her faith. Now she lies in
Waihapa, with nephew Teddy and sister Mary,
both of whom she looked after for many years.

God bless you dear "Auntie" - we know you are
still being an Auntie for us in heaven.

page 82

Pa Matiu
(Father Mathias van Enckevort)
born 24th April 1911
ordained Priest 14th July 1935
Maori Missions 1949
Died 16th July 1980

MEMOIR OF PA MATIU
Tena koutou katoa te whanau o Te Unga Waka. Don't
get too much of a shock when you see this little article.
But I've been asked to write down some of my memories
of Pa Matiu. I want to do it, because memories are
precious things and we should do our best to pass them
on to the next generation.
When Pa Matiu came to Auckland from Panguru,
Father Hyde asked him to stay at St Benedict's till he
could get a place for himself. He was looking for a house
to stay where he could look after the Maori of South
Auckland. My husband, Haupuru had died in 1949 and
was left with my little boy Edward, so I was happy to
look after Pa Matiu.
We lived first of all in the house he found in Wilkinson
Road, Ellerslie. It wasn't a Centre or Church, but it did
have a Prayer Room and Pa was given permission to
reserve the Blessed Sacrament there. So it was like a
little chapel.

19 Wilkinson Road

His job was to range far and wide all over South
Auckland helping the Maori people to keep their faith -
saying Mass in different churches and whizzing around
in his little VW. He was very proud of that car. He kept a
check of every penny spent, from its original price to its
eventual sale, and he proudly announced it cos. only one
and a half pence per mile. I don't what that is in modern
money, but it's not much.
Pa was like that in everything. He was very careful.
When he had a bright idea he worked on it carefully. He
would talk it over with anyone who would listen. He did
tend to go on a bit. But it was no use trying to run away
when he was explaining anything.

Pa Matiu & Pa Nico Zeyen
Vocations Exhibition 1958

It was a fluke that Pa Matiu ever came to New
Zealand. After he was ordained priest in 1935, he
worked in Holland as an organiser. His job was to go
around parishes, giving talks and showing colour slides
to encourage young men to join the Mill Hill Fathers. He
also co-ordinated the fundraising. When World War II
started, he kept to this work, but thought he would never
actually be able to go overseas as a missionary.
But after the War, a lot of Dutch emigrants were
invited by New Zealand to come and make a new home
here. But in 1949 a boat full of emigrants was ready to
sail, but there was no Catholic Chaplain for them. At
least sixty percent of them were Catholics, so Pa Matiu
was asked if he would like the trip, which would last
about six weeks.
This was a nice change for him and he enjoyed the
relaxed atmosphere; no telephones, lots of excited
young people going to a new life away from war-torn
Europe - and only a little bit sea-sick. However, when he
arrive in Wellington, there was a telegram from Mill Hill,
telling him to stay in New Zealand and join the Maori
Mission.

page 83

Pa Matiu in Hokianga. The old bomb belonged to Pa Teo.
It preferred the water-tables to the roads!
He had only brought a few items with him - and
especially he missed his library of books. So Archbishop
McKeefry paid for him to have a quick return trip to pick
up his gear. Then he went to live in Panguru, to learn
from Pa Teo and the people there, first of all language,
and then customs, until he was appointed to the city of
Auckland, to help Pa Tewano.
We lived in Wilkinson Road for nearly ten years and Pa
got on very well with all the South Auckland parishes. He
helped them all and in return they were very generous in
allowing us the use of the parish halls for our
get-togethers.
In 1960, after ten years work, he went on leave to the
Netherlands. While he was away, some of the people in
Glen Innes and Panmure started a fund. They had in
mind the Ordination of Pa Henare which was getting
nearer. We wanted to give him a real Maori Feast, even if
we had to feed the whole world. Father Laidler was filling
in for Pa Matiu at that time.
Pa Matiu liked to be very exact in everything. I can still
see him crouching over his own sewing machine, the
night before Pa Henare's Ordination. He had just been
over to Miria's to check the final pattern for the pari for
Te Rangimarie then he came straight back to 321 where
we had five machines (including Pa's own).

Cutting the Jubilee Cake, Auntie Puti
with Fathers Haring and Laidler.

If I remember right, the fund paid handsomely for
Henare's Ordination and the extra was handed
Archbishop Liston to put into a special fund for o
centre.

I won't go into all the details about the planning and
building of Te Unga Waka. It was an exciting time for all
of us, with Queen Carnivals etc. The greatest thing to me
was to see how the people pulled together, where before
they hardly knew one another. Pa Matiu was kept very
busy interviewing architects, engineers and builders, as
well as his priestly work. When Te Unga Waka was being
built he would take us along each evening, not just to
have a look, but to get busy shifting rubbish and doing
what we could to help things along.
Of course he had his worries too. Sometimes he was
gloomy, especially when he was snubbed by people he
was trying to help. You know what our people can be
like sometimes. One old man (no names) told Pa Matiu
he'd never understand the Maori. Pa replied, "No, but I
understand human nature!"
Pa Matiu eventually left Auckland. He was given
spell in Taupo, ministering to Ngati Tuwharetoa. Hi
health wasn't good at this time and he spent time in
Rotorua Hospital and recuperating in Orewa. Then he
was asked to take over Matata parish and I joined him
there a few months later. He still had the urge to build
While he was there he built a beautiful grotto to Our
Lady.
In 1972 he retired to Blockhouse Bay and looke
forward to enjoying his hobbies, like portrait painting. In
the end he died suddenly from a blood clot, the very day
he was released from hospital. He left us in the middle of
planning a farewell trip to the Netherlands.
Haere, e Pa, haere ki ou hoa Pirihi, haere ki tou Iwi nui
i te po. Haere, haere, haere.
We had a great tangi for him at Te Unga Waka. We all
still think a lot of him. The portraits which he painted
remind us every day of a good man who left his home
overseas to find a new home and family here.
Kia ora,
Teresa (Puti)

page 84

HOKINGA MAHARA
Chris And Pio Jacobs
Tena koutou katoa. E mihi whanui ana ki te iwi kua
haere mai ki te tautoko, ki te whakanui i te HuriTau o Te
Unga Waka. E mihi ana hoki ki o tatou mátua kua mene
atu ra ki te po, te tini o ratou i mahi kaha kia tu te whare
nei o Te Unga Waka, a, i tenei wa kua puta te
puawaitanga o a ratou mahi. Na reira ta maua mihi ki a
ratou, ara, ki a koutou, a, ki a tatou hoki i mahi nui ai kia
tu tenei whare hei awhina i te iwi o ia waka, o ia waka, o
tena rohe, o tena rohe.
E mihi tonu ana hoki ki nga ropu i mau i te kaupapa o
te whare nei, mai i tona timatanga tae noa ki tenei wa. E
mahi nui tonu ana hoki ratou. No reira, e te hunga e mahi
kaha ana i konei i tenei wa kia tu tenei whakamahara huri
tau o to tatou whare, Tena koutou, tena koutou, tena
rawa atu koutou. Ki te iwi whanui hoki e haere mai ana ki
te tautoko i tenei kaupapa ki a koutou aku mihi aroha.
No reira, tena koutou, tena tatou katoa.

Ko te Reo Karanga. Chris calls us to view the Exhibition
of the Mission Museum and the artefacts and photos of
the Sisters of St. Joseph.

I have been asked to open up the book of memories
and one of the first things that comes to mind concerns
our play, Christ The Maori. When Pa Henare was
composing the play, relating Scripture with tikanga
Maori, he looked around for people to fill the roles. Pio
and I were not particularly active at the time, but our
children were in the Rangimarie where it all started. Pa
Henare began to feel that Pio should fill the role of Christ
with myself playing the role of our Lady. He came out to
see us and put it to us. We talked about it, then we
talked about it some more, and we thought, Taihoa! This
is a special thing, because of both the Biblical side and
the taha Maori. What would our people say with regard
to aspects like the tangihanga for Christ which would
take place on the stage. Maori did not believe that you
could portray a dead person with a living one. We were
also surprised that Pa had come to ask us to portray
such holy people. It was an honour, but also a concern. I
know Pio looked at himself and wondered if he should
take on that tapu role of Christ.

Pa asked us to consider it for a week. Now that seems
a long time, but then it seemed no time at all and we had
to make a decision. We had to nut things out; for
instance how would it affect our children who were only
little at the time. In the end we made the decision; if we
really believed in Christ, what are we afraid about?

Welcoming the Christ Child.
Diane, Chris, Maria, Martha, Lena, Mere
(Martha Cash and Mere Daniels have gone to
meet Jesus in reality.)
It was only to be a one night performance, but it ended
seven years later after 52 performances, 53 now with the
latest performance at the Jubilee.
The first performance was at the Festival of Faith at
Hato Petera College. A lot of people came to it. Some,
especially our own relatives, came along because they
were nosey and expected to see Pio die on stage. If you
tangi for a live person, they said, it was a bad omen. The
area was very touchy for us, because we too grew up
with those ideas. Anyway, it all went off so successfully
that people followed us around to every performance for
years.

CENTRE

The youngsters in Christchurch. Tina, Pio Jnr., Gabriel,
Phillip, Tania, Bunny, Sarah, Paddy

We had some great times, taking it from Kaitaia to the
Bluff. It gave us the opportunity to experience the
protocol of different tribes. I remember sitting on one
marae in the early morning, with ice about two inches
thick. And nobody really complained because it was part
of protocol. We did our penance on these occasions.

page 85

The kids thought it was great fun, running around with
no shoes on, even in the cold. This experience helped us
later on when our work took us among different tribal
groups.

Ohaki marae, Ahipara, gave us a bit of a scare when
we were to perform there. Pumi Taituha who is a
knowledgable man, a tohunga, came out with the same
ideas which we had in the beginning. There was tension
there. Our leaders like Manu, Dave, Julie, Pio and I who
were older members at that time, had to make a decision
whether to carry on. Father Geboers was a great support
in our midst at the time. Pio was very strong on the fact
that Tikanga Maori could go together with the
whakapano karaitiana. He had no fear, and as the onus
was on him - he was the "dying" character. It gave us
confidence to carry on. Pumi was actually coming to the
performance, but I think something came up, because l
can't remember him coming.

Tony, Rudolph, Kuia of local people, Eddie Jnr Eddie,
Kuini Dion Mathews, Glen, Paddy, Nadia, Rhoda.

We grew stronger every time we passed
through a testing period like that. Many of
our own people of Pawarenga were
opposed to the performance. They weren't
going to come, but curiosity got the better
of them and they came to see us, expecting
lightening to strike us from heaven! But it
didn't worry us for one moment. We
believed in what we were doing. Pio was so
clear in his mind that he strengthened any
waverers. He used to talk things over with
me and the children, who showed great
understanding, even though they were only
little. As I recall, then and now, the
evangelizing part of it was very strong
among us. Karaiti Te Maori has acted as a
catalyst in the understanding of faith and
Maoritanga. Breakthroughs have occurred
both ways. Aspects of faith in Christ can be
explained in Maori philosophical terms and
ideas.

I look at the Pastoral Plan for Maori people now and
realise that it is part of evangelizing in one's own culture.
We had some great times and made lots of friends.
Some ladies, both nuns and lay people, used to look at
my husband in his role as Christ and (moved, no doubt,
by spiritual values!) they couldn't get close enough to
him!

Sometimes we went in three bus loads, because the
children came along and they were a very important part
of the group and grew up in a spiritual atmosphere. Now
in their teenage years, some of them say they have had
enough religion as youngsters, but it is still there, and
when the time is ripe it shows itself in their lives. They
imbibed a lot of Maori culture on those trips. They have
confidence in themselves as Maori and can walk on to
any marae and know how to carry themselves.
Of course we have had some difficult moments. You
could sense it in the crowds sometimes. How would they
react to our performance? Would it be one of those
occasions when the audience was too quiet? Was the
group putting their heart and soul into it? There were
often tears during the performances, from the audience
but also from us, even after many times.

Resurrection - You could hear the joy in the voices.

page 86

The Resurrection scene was magic, as the voices
echoed our joy at the Rising of Christ. The start too was
pretty special, with the coming of the canoes, from afar,
from Hawaiki itself, implying that Redemption history
didn't just arrive with modern missionaries, but Christ's
grace extended to all waka. It was hard work, making
sure we got the message across.
I can only remember once getting a puncture, but
engine breakdowns did occur. It's funny how often they
happened near the sea, so that everyone could go for a
swim. But it was the devil's own job to get them back on
the bus afterwards. I remember a funny incident on a trip
north when we came to a roundabout. Round it went Pio
in the lead bus, right around, followed by Manu and then
Pat - talk about crazy - three big buses chasing each
other round a roundabout!
Our kuia were marvellous companions on these trips.
But there was a time when some of them nearly died
with fright. Those who had never been to Hokianga
before, thought the road had disappeared when they
went up the Skyline. Poor Auntie Ka fainted and had to
be revived. Mei Waru passed out after we descended,
while she was still smoking! Someone's skirt went on
fire. But on the whole the memories of Christ The Maori
are very happy ones.

Martha, Kahu and Chris, waiting for the Queen.
Photo won an award for Sheena of NZ Herald

Chris shakes hands with the Pope,
watched by Mac Taylor, Dan Whata,
Monty Morrison and his sister Nan

There was plenty of other activities centred on
Unga Waka. The whole Kaupapa was to help our Maori
people, especially those who needed support, and draw
them into our whanau. In the late 60's we got our own
branch of the Maori Women's Welfare League. Auntie
was the first President and Dame Whina was Patron. The
Dame was National President at the time. I became
involved later when Mira was President. The League did
a lot of valuable work, especially for the young mothers.
They were taught Preserving, Cooking, Gardening, Baby
Care - things which are now called Living Skills. The
League had a lot to offer and rallied round families in
need, paying overdue power bills and teaching them to
apply for benefits or to get decent housing. As the years
went by we all became a bit more affluent and the young
people didn't want to learn about survival. They became
used to buying tinned food and ready-made scones and
cakes and clothes. Now times are getting hard again,
it's time they learned some of the old skills again.

Rohario looking after Mummy
For quite a few years Pio was Chairman at Te Unga
Waka. During that time we learned a lot about the
geography of Auckland, from Pukekohe to Wellsford as
we tried to support our people in different parishes.
would often get a ring from a relation, calling us to
tautoko them in some way.

page 87

It was a learning period for us. (I don't think we ever
stop learning.) It could be for a Maori event or for a
church happening. So many of our people have only a
slight connection with their parishes, and they would
want us to give them a lead. They felt comfortable with
us, because we were their relations and they could
eveal their real feelings to us. It was hard work, carrying
other peoples burdens and trying to help them
understand the new insights into faith.
I'll hand over to Pio now to talk about a special event
in our lives, ara, te taenga mai o to tatou Hepara Nui, ko
Hoane Paora te Tuarua.
Kia ora. Me Tautoko ahau i nga kupu mihi i mihia nei e
toku hoa rangatira. He mihi whanui ki a koutou, tena ra
koutou katoa.
We are never likely to forget the coming of the Pope to
Aotearoa. Our committee felt that we had a big
responsibility on our shoulders, because we wanted the
Maori people to be proud of our welcome. But we had to
guide our waka through many shoals to get everything
right.

Organising the Pope's visit; Matiu, Malcolm, Rob, Pio,
Ossie, Anaru

First of all we had to get the blessing of Ngati
Whatua, because it was on their whenua that we
would greet the Pope. They were most helpful.
Doc Wikiriwhi joined our group to help us with the
protocol. Then our troubles started. We were given
a nice sloping area, next to the place where the
Pope would say Mass. But after a while we were
moved up and away to the top of the ridge. We
tried to make the best of it to align our site
towards Potatau and the Whare Taonga. In the meantime, the
shelter for the Pope was being prepared in Penrose. This
was to represent the Kotuku - the White Heron of Single
Flight. Unfortunately the measurements had been
misinterpreted and the Kotuku was so high you couldn't
see what is was supposed to be. 

Robyn Nikora - Kaiwhakaara Pa

Then the tumuaki
pakeha said we should re-align our area, to angle it back
towards the main crowd area. But we were getting
stubborn by now, so he went away breathing fire and
saying, "We'll see about that!" The Mayor's office was
also getting stroppy saying that Kath Tizard had to be
the first to shake hands with the Pope, because she
represented the city. In the end Barry Curtis managed to
side-step that, by inviting her to come along with him
and greet the Pope at the Airport.

Wiki adds his welcome to the Holy Father

Ossie with walkie-talkie and clipboard
Piripi directing the taha Maori
Pio looks in complete control.

In the middle of all this I had a dream. He tino
moemoea, - e heke mai ana nga kaumatua i te ngahere,
ara nga kaumatua no nga wa o mua. Ko te mutunga, ko
te kaumatua o te whakaahua ra, e mau potae ana, e kai
paipa ana, a, e kata ana. Ka mea mai ia ki ahau, "Kei te
pai, kei te tika!" I had never known these old people, but
I sort of recognised them in the dream. I think we all felt
better after this, especially when Sir James Henare gave
us his full support.

page 88

The Pope greets Pa Takuira, Pa Henare and
Sir James Henare.
Some of our own people got very vocal about who
should shake the Pope's hand, who would give the first
karanga. We had invited the leaders of the different
Maori hahi to meet him and some of our Catholic people
felt they should have preference. But we have to explain
to them that this was the wish of the Holy Father who
sees his work as breaking down the barriers which
divide us.
Another problem was security. We didn't want police
control. We claimed that our Maori Wardens would be
enough, and they did a great job alright. There was such
a crowd of people though, that at one time one of his
personal guards was calling out, "I've lost him, I can't
see him!"
The Pope's message to us as a people was full of
wisdom and guidance for the future. We were also
impressed with his Maori pronunciation. (We didn't know
at the time that one of our priests had been helping him
with tape recordings).
I'Il leave the photos to tell the rest of the story. It was a
high point in our lives and the effort was all worthwhile.
No reira, me mutu iho enei korero. E mihi tonu ana ki a
koutou katoa i tenei wa Tiuperi.
Tena koutou me te aroha nui,

Pope greeting Pio

Pa Kereti Cushlow, Pa Wiremu, Doc Wikiriwhi

"I wish to extend special greetings to you the Maori
people of Aotearoa. And to thank you for your cordial
ceremonial welcome.
The strengths of Maori Culture are often the very
values which modern society is in danger of losing; an
acknowledgement of the spiritual dimension in every
aspect of life; a profound reverence for nature and the
environment; a sense of community, assuring every
individual that he or she belongs; loyalty to family and a
great willingness to share; an acceptance of death as
part of life and a capacity to grieve and mourn death in a
human way. As you rightly treasure your culture, let the
Gospel of Christ continue to penetrate and permeate it,
confirming your sense of identity as a unique part of
God's household. It is as Maori that the Lord calls you. It
is as Maori that you belong to the Church, the one Body
of Christ."

Mrs Puti Rare hands over this exquisite cloak to Ka
Corbett. From the collecting of the flax to the last
feather, it took 8 months to make. This korowai was
presented to Pope John Paul at the Maori welcome and
he wore it during his reply speech.

page 89

UNCLE ERIC
Tena koutou e te iwi.
Tena koutou te Whanau Maori
Tena koutou, tena koutou, tena koutou katoa.
A quarter of a century sounds like a long time. And it is
a long time, because that's the time it takes for a whole
new generation to grow up. Luckily it doesn't come all at
once; it just grows on you bit by bit. So my first greetings
go to all those people who have persevered, - people
who put themselves out, day by day, year by year, to
keep up the spirit which started Te Unga Waka.
Out here in the west of Auckland, we have the
Avondale Catholic Maori Society. We can honestly claim
to be steady, reliable supporters of Te Unga Waka right
from the beginning. Father Tuerlings helped and
encouraged us to use our love of gambling to support Te
Unga Waka and at the same time help our own people.
But I'd be telling a lie if I said we always saw eye to
eye with members of Te Unga Waka Runanga. Perhaps
they were living too high with God, whereas we were
very much concerned with our own immediate problems.
For over twenty years we have had an Education
Committee to give help to families for education, books,
uniforms etc. And also an Aroha Committee to help in
times of tangi or when anyone was in hospital. When I
was in hospital a couple of years ago I was bursting with
pride to receive a great big bunch of flowers and a
basket of fruit from our Aroha Committee. However, in
my case, they gave me the bill as well, which sort of
brought me down to earth!

Ken, Robert & Lillian Moka, Robert's Twenty First

I want to pay my respects to those who have gone to
their reward. Harry Tohu, one of our favourite callers was
knocked down and killed, while still only a young man;
Ken Moka also died young, of heart attack, while
working hard preparing for the feast for his mokopuna's
Baptism. 

Sonny Johnson in Action

And, of course, who could forget Sonny
Johnson, a humble man and a great friend, a person
who could organise things very well, yet always in a
cheerful way. When (if?) you get to heaven, don't look for
Sonny on the speakers bench, - you'll find him in the
kitchen, feeding the multitude. 

Rangatahi leaves for Sydney
Front: Mattie Matthews, Lynn & Jan Lundon, Pa Wiremu, Ann Tia, Myrtle Davis
Back: Pat Lundon, Bunny Matthews, Lilian Moka, Dolly Matthews, Sarah Lundon,
Miria Hotere, Diane Adams, Betty & Tama Lundon, Ken Moka, Uncle Eric.

page 90

We can never forget the work the Lundon family did for us, - Pat and
Nan and Mary (Davis), the best secretary we ever had.
She was knocked down and killed in Sandringham Road
on the way home from Housie. That was a tangi I'll never
forget. We had been so depressed with the tragedy, but
as we carried her out to the hearse for the journey north,
it seemed to all of us, as if a weight was lifted from us
and she wanted us to come back from the darkness to
the ao marama. Sally Te Whiu, - we miss her cheerful
voice calling to us across the playground. She's gone
now and Bill too. Then there's Martha Cash, Dan Rapira,
Mary Daniels and my own wife Ann. And so many more.
To them all we say, "Haere ra. Farewell. We'll meet
again."

Two great supporters: Mere Daniels and Ann Kidd
Died within a day of each other. Haere ra korua.

Those of us who are still in the land of the living are all
a bit older. Some are not able to help physically, but we
know that they still work with and encourage the young.
Out here in West Auckland we've long cherished the
idea of having a marae and whare hui of our own. It
would not be in opposition to Te Unga Waka, but it
would supplement it. Several of our people have held the
Chair and other Offices at Te Unga Waka. When Teresa
Tepania was our Chairperson, she would say, "Come on
you people, when are we going to get our marae?"
Eventually we compromised by backing up the
re-building of the old church hall of St Mary's, Avondale;
what was originally the old church. We poured in many
thousands of dollars and a lot of energy. But we are very
proud of the result. We named it Te Whau. Te Whau was
a very important plant in olden times and gave its name
to the district and is also our Maori name for Mount
Eden. We had our first tangi there when we brought in
the body of Dan Rapira. Dan had been a guide and
mentor for so many young families coming into the city.
So we're sure we have a good patron looking after us in
heaven.

Miha Maori in Te Whau. Mike praying. Note the mural by
Masepa, depicting the food sources of the isthmus of Te
Whau (Avondale to Blockhouse Bay)

Uncle Eric watched by Pa Kereti and Pa Bracken

Fr. McKillop had a stiff back, but you can't keep
Uncle Eric down.

page 91

Our "big" chiefs, Kevin, Toi and Bob

I also want to give a plug for the younger generation.
The spirit which built Te Unga Waka is alive and well in
Te Hauauru (West of Auckland.) Young leaders like Toi
(Son of Martha and Dan) have matured in both Maori and
Spiritual ways. Kevin Ngakuru and his wife Gina make
their home into a marae and their garage into a church.
Bob Newson still likes to think he's a spring chicken!, but
he and Gemma have that same spirit of helping others
that they had in the Te Unga Waka Youth.
It's a mistake to start mentioning names, because I'm
bound to miss out someone and they'll never speak to
me again! But I must mention our young artist Masepa
Edwards. She used her artistic talents so effectively in Te
Whau.
I need not mention Mike Tipene, because he's getting
kaumatua like me. But he doesn't do too badly in training
the young people with their weekly meetings.
I take off my hat to them all and say, the future is in
good hands.
God bless you, everyone.
Aroha nui,
Unele Eric

Toi, Martha, Gina, Toni, Huia, Kevin. Welcome to our city marae!

Picnic at Long Bay

Rangatahi at practice

First Reading by Karen. Miha Maori in
Ngakuru's double garage, Ranui.

page 92

HE KUPU MIHI NA PA HOANE

Pa Hoane speaks at June's Farewell

FROM FATHER DIJKMAN

Whai Ora

This Silver Jubilee, like other jubilees is an occasion
to look back, - to look back on the 25 years of Te
Unga Waka, on its history, on the events which make
up its history and above all on the people who
shaped its history. My greetings go out to them all, to
those who are still alive and to those who have
passed away. But these too live on among us in their
achievements and in those who today share their
hopes and their labours for the Maori of Auckland.
At this time many will recall those events which to
them were great occasions or moments to be
treasured. They will be different moments for different
people. I did not have much to do with Te Unga
Waka, but my mind turns back to the induction of the
Kaiarahi. Here was a group of people committing
themselves to explore as Maori the message of Jesus
anew, - to discover what it may have to offer to the
Maori today, and to put it into practice in their own
way, in a Maori way. Here was a group of people who
were prepared to take a lead again. I think it created a
general awareness, that the adult Maori must take
responsibility in the church and, on behalf of the
church, in the world, family community and society.
My greetings go out especially to those people who
spent so many evenings and weekends of hard, but
rewarding study with me. It was a real challenge. But
then I think, - a Maori is only a real Maori, when a real
challenge is taken up.
Thank you for all you shared with me during those
hours. It was a great experience for me. And thanks
to Te Unga Waka for providing the people, the
opportunity and the facilities. Every hour spent in you
was an hour of growth in understanding, a time of
revealing to one another the riches of faith and
culture. And I rejoice, that in years ahead, Pa Henare
will lead you toward a much deeper appreciation.

Aroha nui, na,

Pa Hoane speaks at June's Farewell
Whai Ora

page 93

Aotearoa ki Alaska
Te Unga Waka and Te Rangimarie have provided
stepping stones for young people to see the world. Here
are a couple of extracts from a trip made in 1984 by
some of our members. A party of sixteen travelled to
Alaska as part of a cultural exchange. When practices
started for this group there were about forty or fifty
people eager to take part. But the costs were high, both
in money and in the time involved. As the time drew near
for departure, only sixteen were left, four of whom were
from Rangimarie, Sarah and Tania Jacobs, Tony
Rudolph and Robyn Nikora.

At Port Barrow,Tony with Digs & Pips Ngata
Those are mammoth's tusks.

We left Auckland on a wet, windy day; but there were
heaps of friends, family and relations to give us a warm
farewell. For many of us it was the first time on a plane
and the thought of being 62,000 ft above ground wasn't
very good for the digestive system.
We had stopovers in Honolulu, Seattle and Tacoma,
which helped us to relax a bit. Finally we arrived in
Alaska stopping first at Juneau for a day and then
coming to rest in Anchorage (translation = Te Unga
Waka). We were boarded at the Alaska Pacific
University.

Tony & Robyn and Alaskans
In front of fish-drying rack

There we met our Eskimo guide called Ralph, and
from there we met heaps of Eskimo and Alaskan Indians
The latter were surprised to see that we were very like
them in looks. They had expected something totally
different.

In the great forest - Ritual Dance
The purpose of our visit was a cultural exchange, and
boy, were our cultures exchanged! We did 3 or 4
performances a day to different people and they were
fascinated with our action songs, haka and poi and our
kakahu Maori. We, in turn, were intrigued by their
colourful dances.
As soon as we met they started to fatten us up with
what they call Potlatches, which would be the equivalent
of our hakari. And did they have the works! Fresh salmon
straight from the river, raw whale blubber, more salmon,
caribou, moose, some more salmon, fermented sea
blubber, salmon eggs, seal oil and more salmon
(smoked, baked, broiled, raw, fritters, you name it).

Ritual Dance to drum rhythm
In Alaska there are five main groups of Alaskan Indian,
related to the American Indian tribes. The Eskimo (Inuit)
have three major groupings in the area we visited. The
Indians are quite different physically to the Eskimo. The
Eskimo are more closely related to Asian people
especially from Mongolia, - short, thick-set and very
strong. Whereas the Alaskan Indians are more like Maori;
similar physique and skin colour.

page 94

Tania, Sarah & Faith Murray

We went to Fairbanks, a town north of Anchorage and
spent the day on the Tolovana River at an Indian fishing
post, visited an Athebascan village with its distinctive
Russian Orthodox church and graveyard The local
Rotary Club shouted us a trip to Point Barrow. This is
within the arctic circle. It is the most northerly human
settlement on the American Continent

Alaskan Pataka - keeps food safe from animals.

The highlight for us was our appearance at the
Alaskan State fair in Palmer (nr. Anchorage). The
surrounding hill tops had the Autumn's first dusting of
snow on them.

As we left Alaska we were farewelled by our many new
friends. We will always cherish their friendship and love.
Their customs are very similar to those of the Maori,
especially regarding respect for
their elders, whanaungatanga, and the honouring of the dignity of
every person. Many of their problems are the same as
ours; loss of lands and traditions. But with them it's
worse. They have been pushed around for a far longer
time and more brutally too and it was harder for them to
group together because each different tribe speaks a
totally different language.

We had a lot to think about as we journeyed back to
Godzone. We had stopovers in Portland, Oregon and
Los Angeles, where we became ordinary tourists, having
a jack at everything and experiencing Disneyland. And,
after 24 days, we came down to earth in more ways than
one at Mangere. How true it is, that you leave home in
order to experience the joy of coming back. Kia ora

Sarah, Tania & Faith Murray
in Alaska - with host's baby

page 95

CHARLIE SHELFORD

TE TOA KI TE WHAWHAI

From the first days of Te Unga Waka, Charlie and his
wife Maisie (Blue) were its constant guardians. They
were appointed Wardens and for all the functions they
made sure that things went well. No damage, no
nuisance to neighbours, no boozey good-nights in Clyde
Street. Mostly a stern word from Charlie was enough;
something told the would-be troublemakers that
Charlie's lean frame packed a punch.

On a trip with Rangimarie
In front of me is a piece of paper, fifty years old. It is
the despatch, written in the middle of the Libyan
campaign ... "I wish to recommend Pte Shelford for an
immediate award. During a night attack by this Battalion
on the 14th December against the first line of positions
at Gazala he showed outstanding heroism and courage.
After the first entrenchments had been taken, his section
carried on with the Platoon Commander for a distance of
300 yards to a ridge. The PL Commander then
discovered that his section was now isolated from the
extreme left flank of the battalion and was being fired on
from the right rear and from their left flank. Pte Shelford
volunteered to cover the 300 yards to the Enemy firing
from the rear and clean it out. Meanwhile the Enemy on
the left were sweeping the area with anti-tank guns,
MMGs and LMGs as well as rifle fire. Notwithstanding
the intensity of the Enemy fire from his flank and his
front Pte Shelford covered the 300 yds walking and
running and firing his Spandau machine gun from the
hip. When he was about 20 yds from the trench he was
hit in rapid succession by 3 grenades in the legs. Badly
wounded and dazed he attempted to bring his Spandau
into action but that had been hit and the butt smashed,
so even though he was suffering intense agony he threw
a Mills bomb into the trench. This brought out the
Enemy and by this time his PL Commander and section
arrived and took charge of the prisoners. Altogether four
Officers and 36 O/Ranks came out of the trenches in the
vicinity including the Commander of the Enemy
positions. The surrender of the Commander started the
collapse of the entire position and ended the Enemy
resistance in that area. Pte Shelford's conduct was

outstanding even in action which deeds of bravery we
numerous and in my opinion and the opinion of the P
Commander, certainly merits the Award requested
Then follows signatures and the stamp of Genera
Auchinleck, Commander of the Middle East Forces.

Charlie & Maisie (Beazley)

He was recommended for the Victoria Cross and, if he
had been an Officer, it would probably have been
granted. He was awarded an Immediate Distinguished
Conduct Medal. This was pretty good for a Private. He
was actually in the "glasshouse" when the award arrived
and he had to be speedily cleaned up and given special
leave.
There are dozens of stories about Charlie's exploits
and his attitude. Another time when they were due for a
spot of leave, the orderly ordered him to wear his DCM
ribbon. Then about midnight there was a call from the
Red Cap officer that he had a man in custody for "being
a nuisance and what's more ... he's got a DCM ribbon
which he must have stolen!" Next morning all Charlie
would say was, "It's your b .. fault. You made me wear it.
They didn't run the others in."

page 96

Sorry there isn't room for all the stories, but here is one
from civilian life. Charlie worked for a drainage contractor
and eventually wanted to set up a business for himself. He
had to go with another nine candidates to sit the City Council
exam. The young lady supervisor handed out the questions
and two sheets of foolscap for the answers. "This is no good
for me," said Charlie, "I'll need a lot more paper." When
time was up he handed in his pile of papers, mostly filled
with diagrams. Later he was notified that he and one other
had been successful.
Charlie belonged to Ngati Porou. But perhaps "belonged"
is the wrong word, because Charlie was his own man,
wherever he was, army, iwi, hahi. But he was greatly
attracted to tough characters like his own. Pa Teo (Fr
Wanders) was a great favourite of Charlie's. Charlie's truck
did many miles to help Pa shift his gear from one parish to
another. The minute he heard Pa Teo needed help, he was
there on the doorstep.
Charlie would always help anyone down on their luck -
by offering them a job. Pa Cushlow had been plagued by
a cunning scrounger who used to turn up late on Friday
nights, when you couldn't check his story. However this time
Pa rang up Charlie who immediately offered him a job, even
though it was late at night. The scrounger went pale at the
thought of work and we've never seen him since!
Turo Tepania and Charlie used to visit the sick together
every night. At the Mater they would say prayers over the
intercom and finish up with a Maori hymn. Sister Claver and
the patients very much appreciated these visits.
And there must be dozens of community projects around
Auckland where Charlie helped by laying drainage. On one
of these projects he came across his old Commanding Officer
from the Libyan campaign, Harry Lambert. In Glendowie
School the PTA and committee people asked Charlie to help
them re-laying drainage. In Harry's own words, "Charlie was
willing and very able to supervise, but after watching amateur
navvies for a while he just had to take a more active part
and for several week-ends he was chief navvy, chief
supervisor and chief humorist - in all ways chiefly and all
for aroha.'
After Maisie died, Charlie was lonely and didn't look after
himself very well. Our Caretaker Dolly and her husband
Bunny, all tired to make him feel part of the family when he
stayed at Te Unga Waka. Then came the sad night when
Charlie was crossing Manukau Road and was knocked down
by a hit and run driver. (Later the man owned up and was
very remorseful.) After surviving all that war could throw at
him, in Libya and in Italy, it was tragic that he should die
in suburban Auckland. But we all felt that he had got to the
stage where he didn't care much for life here on earth. Most
of his friends were in heaven.
No reira Charlie, haere ki a ratou, ki ou hoa hoia, ki ou
whanaunga hoki. Kua tae koe ki te rangimarie. E moe, e
moe, e moe.

Mary helping her mother Maisie with the tukutuku panel of
the Holy Family in the Chapel.

Charlie, Bowls Champ. June & Emma looking on.

page 97

ST ANNE'S HOSTEL
The Catholic Schools were always helpful when we
wanted venues for meetings. One place we "adopted"
was St. Anne's Hostel in Shelly Beach Road. It started in
a small way. The Missionary Sisters of the Society of
Mary have a great presence in the islands of the Pacific.
The war disrupted their work and quite a number came
to Auckland. Never ones to sit still, they helped a lot of
families around Ponsonby, Herne Bay and Grey Lynn.
At first they depended on the hospitality of the Mercy
Sisters at St Mary's Ponsonby till Mother Mary Rose
bought a house in Anglesea Street. Bishop Liston invited
them to share in the work of the Maori Mission. So in
1952 they decided to buy a bigger house in Shelly Beach
Road to give accommodation to the young women
coming to the big smoke. The elder Barney Hotere and
Pat Mendes teamed up with Charlotte and Harry Cassidy
and got their families helping to clean up the property
and do some concreting and other jobs. Pa Tewano
used to say Mass every day at the Sisters' place.

Millie is crowned by Bishop Liston

ANGELSEA STREET HOUSE

Dame Whina - St Anne's Garden Fete
They ran a Queen Carnival with candidates from
Motukaraka, Pawarenga, Akarana, Waihou, Panguru and
Mitimiti. Millie Mendes (now Mrs Rudolph) was winner
and the coronation took place in Fanshawe Street Maori
Centre. Dame Whina was very busy at the time, setting
up the Maori Women's Welfare League and agitating for
better housing, but she found time to come along and be
part of the effort. St Anne's was the first city home for a
lot of the young girls. There are still a few Maori who
board there, but the majority of the boarders now come
from Asia and the Pacific Islands.

Queen Millie and Guard of Honour

page 98

Winnie Watereus' wedding at St Anne's

St Anne's Hostel

November 1963 - St Anne's.
Fair to thank the Sisters

Garden Fete at St Anne's

Front: Emily Hotere, Shirley Hathaway, Kuini Cann,
Tot (Bernadette) McMath, Maud Gilbert.
Middle: Martha Cash, Hana Kite, Martha Tipene,
Bernadette Berghan, Aileen Pakinga, Dave Hotere
Back: Ka Gilbert, Billy Hotere, Billy Tipene, Dick Hotere.

Hata Ana Basketball Team
Helen Merito (C.), Yvonne Armstrong, Rita Topia, Philomena Marino,
Pat Broughton, Waina Rore, Mary Anne Marino, Doreen Poha, Mary Matthews.

page 99

He's Bishop Denis' Vicar for Maori
Affairs, He's Bishop Takuira's "legman" for the Maori
Pastoral Plan, he's a guiding hand at Hato Petera, and of
course every no-hoper rings up and says "I'm a cousin
of Pa Henare" (with the implication - "so you'd better
treat me right!") Apologies to his real cousins who are
very numerous - but the real ones keep quiet about it,
because otherwise he'll be sure to give them a job to do.

Pa Pere (Father Bernard Dennehy) is another Diocesan
priest who has joined the Team at Te Unga Waka. He is a
dinkum New Zealander. He was born in Dunedin, but did
his secondary schooling at Sacred Heart College,
Auckland. He was ordained priest for the Auckland
Diocese in 1964 and worked for the first four years in
Ponsonby Parish. He then volunteered for work in South
American and for the next eight years his home was in
Peru. He became fluent in Spanish and visited several of
the countries of South America, having a first-hand look
at the social conditions in those countries.
On his return to New Zealand he preferred to work
among the Maori people and looked after the parish of
Dargaville and later Pawarenga. So that gave him a good
introduction to the people he would meet in Tamaki.

KAIARAHI
Our family of Te Unga Waka has always used Katekita
(Catechists) to lead the Maori prayers. It was also part of
their work to help priests who did not speak Maori, and
to guide them in any Maori situation. This was especially
useful in Auckland city, with over 40 parishes, some of
which have over a hundred Catholic Maori families living
in them.
After Vatican II, every parish was urged to involve lay
people in the work of the parish. This applied also to
Pakeha parishes. People were taught not only to lead
public prayer, but also to give Holy Communion and take
Communion to the sick.
Some of our older Katekita did not feel ready for all
these changes and they preferred to keep to their role of
Prayer Leader. But other younger people including
ladies, came forward. They attended classes and learned
all that was involved in their sharing to the priestly
ministry. It was a revelation to hear some of the quiet,
humble people speak of their faith. We began to use the
term Kaiarahi - Leader, to indicate this new role.

The new Kaiarahi, Toi Rapira, Lucy Te Awhitu
Eugene Harris, with Pa Henare & Pa Pere.
Bishop Mackey came personally to present the first
group with their symbols of authority. As a symbol of
acceptance by the people, our Chairman at the time, Pio
Jacobs, placed the Korowai on their shoulders. This has
been repeated with Bishop Denis, who also used the
symbol of the Hoe Urungi (The Steering Oar). Each time
the same three elements were involved, the stepping
forward by the Candidate, the giving of the Church's
authority, and the public acceptance. Recently, the
public acceptance included the coming forward of every
member of the congregation, old and young, to place
their hands on the head of each new Kaiarahi. Knowing
our people, you will understand that this included hugs
and kisses and congratulations.
Now each Sunday, two Kaiarahi take it in turn to
prepare everything for Mass at Te Unga Waka. They
appoint readers, hymn leader etc. and then welcome
everyone with the proper Maori etiquette.
Eventually we hope to have a Kaiarahi for every Whanau
in the city. This will be a great advantage for family
huihuinga, for preparing the young for the Sacrements
and for preserving the Faith of the next generation.

Monica, Lang and Martha, sponsors for the new Kaiarahi.

page 100

OFFICIALS OF TE UNGA WAKA
Auckland Catholic Maori Society was founded on 11th
June 1961. After the purchase of the old bakery,
meetings were held there, while rebuilding was in
progress, - the first meeting took place there on 15th
December 1963. Dame Whina was the first President
and held office at the official opening of Te Unga Waka
in March 1966. After her the following have been
Presidents:
Laurence Petricevich
Wiki Hotere
Lang davis
Johnson Bristow
Manuera Adams
Pio Hakopa
Ameria Oppenheim
Makere Bohte'

Laurence Petricevich

Lang Davis with Cardinal Delargy

SECRETARIES
Wiki Hotere
Tai Patrick
Veronica Hauraki
Josephine Cooper
Kathy Bristow
Bernadette Berghan
Teresa Tepania
Rita Rudolph
Miria Oppenheim
Rob Cooper
Lola White
Rehu Harris
Anna Hotere

ASSISTANT SECRETARIES
Tom Thompson, Jerry Clarke,
Tatiana Thompson Urania Peita,
Teresa Paparoa.

TREASURERS
(This position is now held
by the Secretary)

Tai Patrick

Pa Matiu (Fr.v.Enckevort)

(In younger days)

Fr Bierbooms
Fr O'Brien
Fr Geboers
Fr Bachmann
Ossie Perry
Bob Newson
Anne Batistich
Sr Elizabeth
Urania Peita
Lola White

MARAE COMMITTEE
To organise and cater for functions on the marae is a
big task. Unless you've been involved, you can't imagine
the continuous struggle to keep everything up to
scratch. Every so often, an announcement is made in the
weekly Newsletter, that volunteers are needed for
making pillowslips, re-covering mattresses - and please
bring you own sewing machine. There's floors to be
polished and sometimes sanded and re-varnished. The
kitchen and its equipment and the crockery have to be
kept up to standard.

In the beginning, the catering was done by the Komiti
Wahine or another of the marae groups and it was only
in February 1973 that the Komiti Marae was firmly
established.
At present the Marae Committee is essentially the
same as the Housie Organising Committee, It has
eighteen members who take on the job of fund raising,
through Housie, Canteen, Raffles and other efforts. They
are our main sources of income. These are quite distinct
from Koha given by visiting groups.
At Housie, Dolly and Lucia, with assistance from
Moana Hotere, look after the main table. Marietta Rihari
(Te Wake) and Marrion Lee are the Callers, while Sue
Ball takes a rest from that job. The Floor-Walkers are
Mahu Makiri, Pamela Norman and Eileen Chambers (Te
Wake). In the kitchen, Nina and her daughter Geraldine
join forces with Kathy Allen, Pauline Russell, Bonita
Diamond and Dorothy Makiri. Diane Worwood and her
daughters Geraldine and Tracey also join in where
needed.
Early members of the marae committee were of
course Auntie Puti and her whanau, which included
Sonny Johnson and all his whanau, Charlie and Blue
Shelford, Bubbles (Cecilia Lundon), Molly Houpapa, Tui
Swannenbeck (Campbell) and Johnson Bristow. We pay
our respects to the past Committees who gave so many
hours of their time, without a thought of personal gain, in
order to help the marae. A marae in the city has many
more expenses than a country marae. The rates are a
continual burden, and the services sends us huge bills,
as though we were a money-making firm.

Bubbles was one of the longest-serving Housie
managers, followed by Manu Adams. For a time Uncle
Eric and Dolly also put a lot of energy into running
Housie, both Te Unga Waka and Avondale, Thursday
and Friday nights. But patronage was falling off and
Sonny Johnson suggested a change to Saturday
afternoon and he agreed to manage it. Sonny, his family
and the Te Atatu Committee had been running a very
keen Housie in Te Atatu. But the very morning that he
was due to take over, Sonny fell dead from a heart
attack. What a tragedy! Sonny was one of that rare
breed of people who are good managers, but kindly and
gentle as well.
Gemma Newson and Dorothy Makiri, Kevin Ngakuru
and all his whanau all served on the Committee. Molly
Houpapa and Annette ran the Canteen for quite a few
years.
Let's not forget the Secretaries, Lola and Rehu and
now, Anna Hotere. Ex officio, the Runanga Secretary
becomes the Marae Committee Secretary. And there's
quite a few more helpers. Hope we haven't forgotten any
of our "Regulars".

page 101

FR. BENNETT (PA RAWIRI) ORDAINED 1968

Samuel Bennett, Pa Rawiri, Octavia, Bishop Manu Bennett
(father) (Stepmother)
Patohe Stephens of Wanganui, Arihia Bennett
(mother's Auntie) (grandmother)

Tikihuia Hotere presents the challenge
when Pa Rawiri (Fr. Dave Bennett)
arrives at Te Unga Waka.

Pa Rawiri gives Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament
for the first time.

Dr Henry Bennett, Bishop Liston, Bishop Bennett
(brother to Manu)

(Bishop-elect at this time)

Pa Rawiri, Pa Henare, Pa Wiremu Te Awhitu

FR. P. Bierbooms, Bishop Panapa, Fr. W Tuerlings, Fr T. Sloane

Our first three Maori priests.

page 102

Harry Davis & Pa Henare leave to study Credit Unions in Fiji.
Lou, Jack, Tilly, Emily, Manu, Julie, Harry, Dick, Whina,
Pauline, Nan, Moana, Jack, Kataraina, Martha

Atomio Kapeli (father of Gemma & Marietta)
prepares the yangona/kava for Fr Geaney

Fr Geaney from Fiji, where he was
helping to set up Credit Unions

The Credit Union did good work for several years and
tribute must be paid to the workers who collected the
weekly payments. It helped families to furnish their homes.
Unfortunately, the rules were not strictly adhered to and bad
debts began to accumulate. In spite of the efforts made -
especially those of the late Molly Houpapa - it had to close
down. God bless you Molly for your valiant efforts.

Fr O'Brien receives the kava (yangona).

Crossbearer Tama Lundon (now a famous
member of the Herbs), Pa Petera Bierbooms
and Pa Wiremu Tuerlings.

page 103

Celebrity guests Sonia King & Cherry Raymond
with Mira Szazy and Dame Whina

Combined Choirs practising Marama Pa

A talented entertainer John Keogh
with his mother Peri

Rangimarie welcomes Sue Ryder on the tarmac at Auckland
Airport.
Sue, wife of Group Capt Cheshire, was organiser
of the Cheshire Homes for the Sick.

Jack & Peri Keogh singing
one of their duets

Pa Ryan & Pa Petera Silver Jubilee
of their Ordination 1978

Pa Ryan's sister Mary, visitng
from England, and Pam Lestrange

page 104

Kiri Te Kanawa
Dear Family of Te Unga Waka,
Thank you for your recent letter, inviting
me to contribute a message to your Silver
Jubilee Magazine. I sincerely hope that it's
not too late to send my greetings and
encouragement to you all. I understand how
important such occasions are to all Maori
people. Four years ago I shared in the
unforgettable reunion of the Te Kanawa
Hapu in Te Kuiti on our family marae. We
had a three day hui, with over two hundred
of the family joining in.
I see you had a nine day reunion and I'm
sure it was a wonderful time to meet old
acquaintances and talk over all the happy
memories and also, of course, to say our
farewells to those who are no longer with
us.
I am still grateful to you for forming the
'Guard of Honour" at our Wedding and
twelve days later, giving Desmond and
myself a very happy "honeymoon" concert
at Te Unga Waka.
I remember taking part in such concerts
in the early sixties to raise money for the
Catholic Maori Centre, in school halls and
parish halls and in the Maori Community
Centre. It was an exciting time, with many
great entertainers giving of their talents.
There was Diane Winterburn, Hannah
Tatana, Lou and Simon, George Tumahai
and the Rangimarie group with their
beautiful leader, Miria Hotere.

Sadly, some of them have left this earthly
stage, Diane, George, Miria, Father v.
Enckevort (pa Matiu). Farewell - haere, e
nga mate. Haere ki te waiata i te Kapa o nga
Ahere. Haere, haere, haere.
Please excuse me if I fail to mention
anyone whom I should remember, but
twenty-five years plays tricks with the
memory. And my work takes me all over the
world and far from friends in Aotearoa
Sadly, I have not lived there for many years
However I do enjoy my brief visits.
I'm sure my Maori heritage has helped me
to cope with various situations around the
world. So, please, never lose the gift of
laughter and song which is our Koha to the
world.

Aroha nui,

Kiri Te Kanawa and her accompanist Barbara Connelly being
welcomed by Rangimarie as she returns with the trophy for
winner of the Melbourne Sun Aria. Rangimarie members are
Pat Smith, Manu Adams, Wayne Campbell, Weka Makiri, Miria
Hotere, Edward Makiri, Pauline Russel, Whina Cooper, Milly
Hotere, Martha Cash, and Mary (Kuia) Campbell.

page 105

Te Ariki leads in the Ope.
Pumi Taituha and Kingi lhaka on either side.

Blessing of Taonga to be worn in Spain. These were
a gift of aroha carved by the women of Arohata Prison.

Huia present the taonga to
Queen Te Ata-i-rangi-kaahu.

Piripi and Kito help Sir Kingi.

Queen Te Ata, Sir Howard Morrison, Pa Henare,
Lang Davis, Max Cryer, John Turei.

page 106

A MAORI POPE

Pa Henare exchanges Taonga with Pope Paul VI

28th Maori Battalion visit to Vatican
Pa Henare gives the Kakahu Maori to
Pope Paul VI

Waiting for Pope John Paul II

Johnny Williams, Brother Dan, Celia Collins, Lorna Peri,
Arthur McMath, Sister Dorothy, Sisters Patricia, Katarina

When Pope Paul VI died, we brought his Tangi to Te Unga Waka

